preface
carbon in earth is an outgrowth of the deep carbon observatory (dco), a 10-year international research effort dedicated to achieving transformational understanding of the chemical and biological roles of carbon in earth (http://dco.ciw.edu).
hundreds of researchers from 6 continents, including all 51 coauthors of this volume, are now engaged in the dco effort.
we proposed this volume of the reviews in mineralogy and geochemistry (rimg) series as a benchmark for our present understanding of earth’s carbon—both what we know and what we have yet to learn.
our ambition is to produce a second, companion volume to mark the progress of this decadal initiative.
this volume addresses a range of questions that were articulated in may 2008 at the first deep carbon cycle workshop in washington, dc.
at that meeting 110 scientists from a dozen countries set forth the state of knowledge about earth’s carbon.
they also debated the key opportunities and top objectives facing the community.
subsequent deep carbon meetings in bejing, china (2010), novosibirsk, russia (2011), and washington, dc (2012), as well as more than a dozen smaller workshops, expanded and refined the dco’s decadal goals.
the 19 chapters that follow elaborate on those opportunities and objectives.
a striking characteristic of carbon in earth is the multidisciplinary scientific approach necessary to encompass this topic.
the following chapters address such diverse aspects as the fundamental physics and chemistry of carbon at extreme conditions, the possible character of deep-earth carbon-bearing minerals, the geodynamics of earth’s large-scale fluid fluxes, tectonic implications of diamond inclusions, geosynthesis of organic molecules and the origins of life, the changing carbon cycle through deep time, and the vast subsurface microbial biosphere (including the hidden deep viriosphere).
accordingly, the collective authorship of carbon in earth represents laboratory, field, and theoretical researchers from the full range of physical and biological sciences.
a hallmark of the dco is our desire to implement advanced strategies in communications, data management, engagement, and visualization.
accordingly, this volume incorporates some novel aspects.
thanks to sponsorship by the alfred p. sloan foundation, which continues to provide significant support for the dco, this is the first of the rimg series to be published as an open access volume.
we have thus been able to focus on the electronic publication to incorporate a number of novel features, including hyperlinks to websites and databases, video and animations, and direct links to many references.
this effort has benefitted immeasurably from the contributions of numerous individuals.
in particular we are grateful to jesse ausubel and his colleagues at the alfred p. sloan foundation for generous support in the production and publication of this open access volume.
we thank the many reviewers, who have greatly enhanced each chapter.
we are especially grateful to jodi rosso and the editorial staff of the mineralogical society of america for their continuing efforts to produce this extraordinary rimg series.
﻿  chapter 1: why deep carbon?
all chemical elements are special, but some are more special than others.
of the 88 naturally occurring, long-lived elements on earth, carbon stands alone.
as the basis of all biomolecules, no other element contributes so centrally to the wellbeing and sustainability of life on earth, including our human species.
the near-surface carbon cycle profoundly affects earth’s changeable climate, the health of ecosystems, the availability of inexpensive energy, and the resilience of the environment.
no other element plays a role in so diverse an array of useful solid, liquid, and gaseous materials: fuels; abrasives and lubricants; electrical conductors and insulators, thermal conductors and insulators; ultra-strong structural materials and ultra-soft textiles; and precious stones of unmatched beauty.
no other element engages in such an extraordinary range of chemical bonding environments: with oxidation states ranging from -4 to +4, carbon bonds to itself and more than 80 other elements.
carbon’s chemical behavior in earth’s hidden deep interior epitomizes the dynamic processes that set apart our planet from all other known worlds.
past consideration of the global carbon cycle has focused primarily on the atmosphere, oceans, and shallow crustal environments.
a tremendous amount is known about these parts of earth’s carbon cycle.
by contrast, relatively little is known about the deep carbon cycle (fig.
1).
knowledge of the deep interior, which may contain more than 90% of earth’s carbon (javoy 1997), is limited (table 1).
basic questions about deep carbon are poorly constrained:
• how much carbon is stored in earth’s deep interior?
• what are the reservoirs of that carbon?
• how does carbon move among reservoirs?
• are there significant carbon fluxes between earth’s deep interior and the surface?
• what is the nature and extent of deep microbial life?
• did deep biochemistry play a role in life’s origins?
• are there deep sources of hydrocarbons?
key unanswered questions guide research on carbon in earth.
perhaps most fundamental are questions related to understanding the physical and chemical behavior of carbon-bearing phases at extreme conditions representative of the deep interiors of earth and other planets.
we need to inventory possible c-bearing minerals at pressures and temperatures to hundreds of gigapascals and thousands of degrees and we must characterize the physical and thermochemical properties of those phases at relevant p-t conditions both experimentally and theoretically (hazen et al.
2013a, chapter 2; oganov et al.
2013, chapter 3).
we need to investigate the diversity of carbon minerals over time (hazen et al.
2013b, chapter 4).
we must also understand the behavior of carbon-bearing fluids, and compile a comprehensive database of thermochemical properties and speciation of c-o-h-n fluids extending to upper mantle pressure and temperature conditions (manning et al.
2013, chapter 5).
the nature and extent of carbon reservoirs in earth’s deep interior is fundamental to understanding carbon in earth.
primitive carbonaceous chondritic meteorites provide one proxy for the composition of the earliest solar system and, by extension, earth at the time of its formation (marty et al.
2013, chapter 6).
however, the several weight percent carbon in those meteorites is one to two orders of magnitude greater than earth’s confirmed carbon reservoirs.
what happened to the missing carbon?
one key to answering this question is a comprehensive characterization of mantle carbon reservoirs and quantification of deep fluxes of carbon-bearing fluids to and from the mantle—the essence of the deep carbon cycle (dasgupta, 2013, chapter 7).
current estimates of the carbon flux into earth’s mantle through tectonic subduction exceed by an order of magnitude the known carbon flux emitted by volcanoes—an untenable balance that would deplete surface reservoirs of carbon in significantly less than a billion years.
added to these uncertainties, we do not know the extent to which carbon could represent a significant element in earth’s core (wood et al.
2013, chapter 8).
could trace amounts of carbon (a few parts per million) enter mantle silicate minerals or melts (ni and keppler 2013, chapter 9)?
these potential volumetrically large but diffuse carbon reservoirs contrast with such concentrated deep carbon phases as carbonate magmas (jones et al.
2013, chapter 10) and diamonds (shirey et al.
2013, chapter 12), as well as volcanic emissions of carbon species (burton 2013, chapter 11), which provide special insights to earth’s dynamic state and complex history.
progress in all of these areas depends on the development of new instrumentation, including environmental chambers to access c-bearing samples in new regimes of p-t under controlled conditions (e.g., ph, fo2) and with increased sample volumes, as well as enhanced analytical facilities for investigating carbon-bearing samples at the nanometer scale (mao and boulard 2013, chapter 13).
a central aspect of earth’s carbon cycle—one fundamentally tied to economic and environmental concerns—is the nature, sources, and evolution of subsurface organic molecules, including hydrocarbons and biomolecules.
while a biologically mediated origin is postulated for most of earth’s so-called “fossil fuels,” debates continue on the genesis of some deep hydrocarbons (sephton and hazen 2013, chapter 14).
to understand possible deep abiotic organic synthesis, including prebiotic processes that set the stage for life, we need to exploit experimental procedures to mimic deep hydrothermal geochemical environments (mccollom, chapter 15).
in this regard, a comprehensive understanding of diverse mineral-molecule nano-scale interactions at the fluid-rock interface is required (cole et al.
2013, chapter 16).
any overview of carbon in earth must assess the fascinating role of deep subsurface microbial life, which, though sparse, is widespread and thus may represent a significant fraction of earth’s total biomass.
in our efforts to assess the nature and extent of the deep microbial biosphere, we are conducting a global 3-d census of deep microbial life, including both terrestrial and marine ecosystems (colwell and d’hondt 2013, chapter 17).
central to any discussion of deep biology is energy flow, as exemplified by zones of serpentinization—zones of intense hydrogen production that possibly represent the oldest ecosystem on earth (schrenk et al.
2013, chapter 18).
any understanding of the nature and survival of deep life entails investigations of biomolecular adaptations under extreme conditions, which in turn necessitates a new laboratory-based approach to studying life at extreme pressures and temperatures (meersman et al.
2013, chapter 19).
most enigmatic of all are deep viruses, which promote rapid microbial turnover rates and lateral gene transfer and thus may play the dominant role in evolution of subsurface ecosystems (baross et al.
2013, chapter 20).
at this stage in our pursuit of a fundamental understanding of carbon in earth, our knowledge baseline as set forth in the following chapters is significant, but the unanswered questions—what we know we don’t know—far outweigh what we know.
that’s an energizing state for any scientific pursuit, for the unknown is what beckons us to the laboratory, the field, and the computer.
and yet, as we embark on this decadal quest, the greatest lure is not so much the assurance that we will fill in many gaps in what we know we don’t know, but rather that we will discover entirely new, unanticipated phenomena.
even though we are unable to articulate what those discoveries might be, we can be assured that such adventures lie in wait for the curious and prepared mind.
figure
fig.
1.
earth’s deep carbon cycle.
there is still much to learn about the cycling, behavior, and storage of earth’s deep carbon, from crust to core.
poorly quantified reservoirs of carbon in the crust include (a) microbial community structures on mid-ocean ridge flanks (adapted from images by rosalind coggon and benoit idlefonse).
other deep biosphere habitats affecting subsurface carbon cycling also exist.
(b) an epifluorescence micrograph shows an iron-reducing enrichment culture from a serpentinite-hosted habitat.
(image: matt schrenk).
(c) diamonds and their inclusions provide glimpses into earth’s deep interior (photo: u.s. geological survey).
theoretical and experimental studies allow us to speculate on carbon's role even deeper in earth.
(d) theoretically, iron carbide (f7c3) is a potential constituent of earth’s solid inner core (image: yoichi nakajima).
(e) experimental studies suggest the existence of magnesium-iron carbon-bearing structures similar to phase ii of magnesite at high pressures corresponding to depths greater than 1800 kilometers (image: eglantine boulard).
﻿  chapter 2: carbon mineralogy and crystal chemistry
introduction
carbon, element 6, displays remarkable chemical flexibility and thus is unique in the diversity of its mineralogical roles.
carbon has the ability to bond to itself and to more than 80 other elements in a variety of bonding topologies, most commonly in 2-, 3-, and 4-coordination.
with oxidation numbers ranging from -4 to +4, carbon is observed to behave as a cation, as an anion, and as a neutral species in phases with an astonishing range of crystal structures, chemical bonding, and physical and chemical properties.
this versatile element concentrates in dozens of different earth repositories, from the atmosphere and oceans to the crust, mantle, and core, including solids, liquids, and gases as both a major and trace element (holland 1984; berner 2004; hazen et al.
2012).
therefore, any comprehensive survey of carbon in earth must consider the broad range of carbon-bearing phases.
the objective of this chapter is to review the mineralogy and crystal chemistry of carbon, with a focus primarily on phases in which carbon is an essential element: most notably the polymorphs of carbon, the carbides, and the carbonates.
the possible role of trace carbon in nominally acarbonaceous silicates and oxides, though potentially a large and undocumented reservoir of the mantle and core (wood 1993; jana and walker 1997; freund et al.
2001; mcdonough 2003; keppler et al.
2003; shcheka et al.
2006; dasgupta 2013; ni and keppler 2013; wood et al.
2013), is not considered here.
non-mineralogical carbon-bearing phases treated elsewhere, including in this volume, include c-o-h-n aqueous fluids (javoy 1997; zhang and duan 2009; jones et al.
2013; manning et al.
2013); silicate melts (dasgupta et al.
2007; dasgupta 2013; manning et al.
2013); carbonate melts (cox 1980; kramers et al.
1981; wilson and head 2007; walter et al.
2008; jones et al.
2013); a rich variety of organic molecules, including methane and higher hydrocarbons (mccollom and simoneit 1999; kenney et al.
2001; kutcherov et al.
2002; sherwood-lollar et al.
2002; scott et al.
2004; helgeson et al.
2009; mccollom 2013; sephton and hazen 2013); and subsurface microbial life (parkes et al.
1993; gold 1999; chapelle et al.
2002; d’hondt et al.
2004; roussel et al.
2008; colwell and d’hondt 2013; schrenk et al.
2013; meersman et al.
2013; anderson et al.
2013).
the international mineralogical association (ima) recognizes more than 380 carbon-bearing minerals (http://rruff.info/ima/), including carbon polymorphs, carbides, carbonates, and a variety of minerals that incorporate organic carbon in the form of molecular crystals, organic anions, or clathrates.
this chapter reviews systematically carbon mineralogy and crystal chemistry, with a focus on those phases most likely to play a role in the crust.
additional high-temperature and high-pressure carbon-bearing minerals that may play a role in the mantle and core are considered in the next chapter on deep carbon mineralogy (oganov et al.
2013).
systematic carbon mineralogy
carbon, a non-metal that typically forms covalent bonds with a variety of other elements, is the most chemically adaptable element of the periodic table.
in an ionic sense, element 6 can act as a cation with oxidation number +4, as in carbon dioxide (co2) or in the carbonate anion   (co3-2).
alternatively, carbon can act as an anion with oxidation number as low as -4, as in methane (ch4) and in other alkanes.
carbon also frequently displays a range of intermediate oxidation number states from +2 in carbon monoxide (co) or -2 in methanol (ch3oh), as well as occurring in its neutral state (c) in a variety of carbon allotropes.
carbon chemistry is also enriched by the ability of c to form single, double, or triple bonds, both with itself and with a wide range of other chemical elements.
in many carbon compounds each c atom bonds to 4 other atoms by single bonds, as in methane and carbon tetrafluoride (cf4).
but carbon commonly forms double bonds with itself, for example in ethene (h2c=ch2), oxygen in carbon dioxide (o=c=o), or sulfur in carbon disulfide (s=c=s), and it can form triple bonds with itself, as in ethylene (commonly known as acetylene; hc≡ch), or with nitrogen, as in hydrogen cyanide (hc≡n).
carbon’s remarkably diverse mineralogy arises in part from this unmatched range of valence states and bond types.
in the following sections we review the systematic mineralogy of carbon, including carbon allotropes, carbides, carbonates, and minerals that incorporate organic carbon molecules.
carbon allotropes
the element carbon occurs in several allotropes, including graphite, diamond, lonsdaleite, fullerenes (including buckyballs and carbon nanotubes), graphene, and several non-crystalline forms (table 1).
these varied carbon allotropes exhibit extremes in physical and chemical properties—variations that reflect differences in their atomic structures.
diamond and lonsdaleite are the hardest known substances, whereas graphite is among the softest.
transparent diamond is an exceptional electrical insulator while possessing the highest known thermal conductivity at room temperature, whereas opaque graphite is an electrical conductor and thermal insulator.
isotropic diamond is widely used as a tough abrasive, whereas anisotropic graphite is employed as a lubricant.
diamond possesses the highest nuclear density of any known condensed phase at ambient conditions (zhu et al.
2011) and is predicted to have high-pressure phases of even greater density (oganov et al.
2013), whereas some carbon nanogels feature among the lowest known nuclear densities.
here we focus on the essential characteristics of the three most common minerals of native carbon—graphite, diamond, and lonsdaleite—all of which play roles in earth’s subsurface carbon cycle.
for more comprehensive reviews of the chemical and physical properties of these carbon polymorphs see bragg et al.
(1965), deer et al.
(1966), field (1979), davies (1984), klein and hurlbut (1993), harlow (1998), and zaitsev (2001).
graphite.
carbon forms covalent bonds with itself in all of the carbon polymorphs, in which c adopts one of two coordination environments (table 1).
in graphite, graphene, buckyballs, nanotubes, and several types of amorphous and glassy carbon, the carbon atoms are in planar three-coordination.
this trigonal coordination, with typical c-c distances of ~1.42 å and c-c-c angles close to 120 degrees, results from the hybridization of carbon’s electrons into three orbitals, known as the sp2 bonding configuration because the 2s orbital mixes (or hybridizes) with two 2p orbitals to form three sp2 orbitals.
the hexagonal layered structure of graphite (figure 1a; rotating structure #1) features electrically neutral, monoatomic, flat carbon layers, which bond to each other through van der waals attractions and which are separated from each other by 3.41 å.
this layered structure leads to the distinctive, highly anisotropic properties of graphite (figure 1b).
individual carbon layers, which are known as graphene when meticulously separated from a graphite crystal or vapor deposited, are extremely strong and display unique electronic and mechanical properties (geim and novoselov 2007; geim 2009).
weak van der waal’s forces between these layers lead to graphite’s applications in lubricants and as pencil “lead.”
natural graphite is a common crustal mineral that occurs most abundantly in metamorphic rocks in pods and veins as a consequence of the reduction and dehydration of sediments rich in carbon (e.g., klein and hurlbut 1993).
commercial metamorphic graphite deposits, notably from china, india, and brazil, are exploited in the manufacture of pencils, lubricants, steel, and brake linings.
graphite is also found as an accessory mineral in some igneous rocks and as a micro- or nano-phase in a variety of meteorites.
in these diverse lithologies graphite is commonly precipitated in veins from reduced c-o-h fluids (rumble and hoering 1986; rumble et al.
1986).
in addition, graphite can crystallize from the vapor state in the carbon-rich, expanding hot envelopes of energetic late-stage stars, including supernovas.
diamond and lonsdaleite.
in contrast to the sp2 bonding environment of carbon in graphite, each carbon atom can bind to 4 adjacent c atoms in tetrahedral coordination, as exemplified by the diamond and lonsdaleite polymorphs (figures 2 and 3; rotating structures 2 and 3).
the c-c distance in these minerals are ~1.54 å, while c-c-c angles are close to the ideal tetrahedral value of 109.5 degrees.
this tetrahedral bonding configuration reflects the hybridization of one 2s and three 2p orbitals from each carbon atom to form four sp3 orbitals.
the structures of cubic diamond and hexagonal lonsdaleite are similar: both forms of carbon feature tetrahedral coordination of c in a three-dimensional framework.
however, given a flat layer of linked carbon tetrahedra with all vertices pointed in the same direction (layer a), there exist two ways to stack subsequent layers, in orientations described as b or c. the diamond structure represents a three-layer stacking sequence of […abcabc…] along the (111) cubic direction, whereas lonsdaleite stacking is two-layer […abab…] along the (001) hexagonal direction.
a similar stacking difference distinguishes the cubic and hexagonal forms of a number of topologically similar mineral pairs, such as the polymorphs of zinc sulfide (zns), sphalerite and wurtzite, respectively.
note also that the stacking sequence of these carbon polymorphs can incorporate errors, as is often the case with lonsdaleite that has formed by impact shock of graphite (frondel and marvin 1967).
the framework structures of diamond and lonsdaleite lead to their superlative physical and chemical properties (davies 1984).
notably, the exceptional hardness and strength of these phases arises from the strong three-dimensional network of c-c bonds.
recent theoretical studies on diamond and lonsdaleite suggest that diamond possesses the greater strength (pan et al.
2009; lyakhov and oganov 2011).
the key to understanding the contrasting properties of the natural carbon allotropes is their different pressure-temperature stability fields.
the deep origin of diamond was first recognized in the years following the widely publicized discovery of the 20-carat eureka diamond by children playing in a dry central south african streambed in 1866, and the even more dramatic 83.5-carat star of south africa diamond two years later.
a subsequent diamond rush brought more than 10,000 prospectors to the semi-desert region, and inevitably led to the recognition of diamond in their volcanic host rock, dubbed kimberlite (davies 1984; hazen 1999).
the south african kimberlites’ cone-shaped deposits, which cut vertically through shattered country rock, spoke of violent explosive eruptions from great depth (lewis 1887; bergman 1987; mitchell 1995).
the hypothesis that diamond comes from depth was reinforced by determination of the crystal structures of diamond versus graphite (bragg and bragg 1913; hull 1917; hassel and mark 1924; bernal 1924).
the higher coordination number of carbon in diamond (4-fold) compared to graphite (3-fold), coupled with its much greater density (3.51 versus 2.23 g/cm3), provided physical proof that diamond was the higher-pressure polymorph.
early determinations of the carbon phase diagram (rossini and jessup 1938), though refined in subsequent years (bundy et al.
1961; kennedy and kennedy 1976; day 2012; figure 4), revealed that diamond is the higher-pressure, lower-temperature form and that, under a normal continental geotherm, diamond likely forms at depths greater than 100 kilometers.
by contrast, the steeper geothermal gradients of the oceanic crust and mantle preclude diamond formation, at least within the sub-oceanic upper mantle and transition zone.
efforts to synthesize diamond under extreme laboratory conditions extend back to the early 1800s, long before the crucial role of high-pressure was recognized (mellor 1924; hazen 1999).
among the most renowned 19th-century chemists to try his hand at diamond making was frederick-henri moissan, who won the nobel prize for his risky isolation of the dangerous element fluorine.
moissan employed a novel electric arc furnace to generate record temperatures ~3000°c.
moissan initially thought he was successful in synthesizing diamond but is now known to have formed hard, transparent crystals of silicon carbide—a compound that he also discovered in nature, and what is now known as the mineral moissanite (moissan 1904a; hazen 1999; see below).
numerous other heroic efforts prior to 1950 also failed (bridgman 1931, 1946; von platen 1962; coes 1962).
in spite of the relatively accessible pressure-temperature regime of diamond stability > 4 gpa (approximately 40,000 atmospheres or 40 kilobars), the transition from graphite to diamond is kinetically inhibited.
the keys to facile diamond synthesis—employing a liquid metal flux coupled with sustained pressures above 5 gpa and temperatures above 1200°c—were not achieved until the post-world war ii efforts by scientists at the general electric research laboratory in schenectady, new york (bundy et al.
1955; suits 1960, 1965; wentorf 1962; hall 1970; strong 1989; hazen 1999).
the breakthrough of high-pressure diamond synthesis by francis bundy, tracy hall, herbert strong, and robert wentorf in december of 1954 led to what is today a multi-billion dollar industry that supplies annually hundreds of tons of industrial diamond abrasives.
two other synthesis techniques have expanded the varieties of diamond available for commercial exploitation.
of special interest are efforts to generate diamond and lonsdaleite under shock conditions that mimic bolide impact events (decarli and jamieson 1961; beard 1988).
in some meteorites lonsdaleite and/or diamond is found to replace graphite in crystallites that retain a hexagonal shape (langenhorst et al.
1999; el goresy et al.
2001; langenhorst and deutsch 2012).
in this rapid, solid-state martensitic transition the flat, graphitic sp2 planes of carbon atoms shift relative to each other and buckle to produce an sp3 array of c layers that are rather disordered in their stacking arrangement.
the subsequent discovery of techniques for diamond and lonsdaleite synthesis by vapor deposition at low-pressure conditions that mimic diamond formation in expanding stellar envelopes has greatly increased the potential for diamond use in science and industry (angus et al.
1968; derjaguin and fedoseev 1968; angus and hayman 1988; spear and dismukes 1994; irifune and hemley 2012).
these varied efforts in diamond synthesis have produced exceptional new materials, including isotopically pure diamonds with the highest recorded thermal conductivity, semiconducting diamonds, nano-crystalline polishing powders, lonsdaleite crystals that are harder than many natural diamond, and a range of deeply colored flawless synthetic gemstones up to 10 carats (liang et al.
2009; meng et al.
2012).
intense research on natural diamond is also providing important insights regarding earth’s geochemical and tectonic evolution.
a number of recent studies focus on diamond’s rich and revealing suites of oxide, silicate, carbide, and sulfide inclusions from depths of up to perhaps 850 kilometers—mantle samples that provide evidence for aspects of geochemical and tectonic evolution over more than 3 billion years of earth history (shirey et al.
2002; mccammon et al.
2004; sommer et al.
2007; pearson et al.
2007; gübelin and koivula 2008; shirey and richardson 2011; walter et al.
2011; shirey et al.
2013).
carbides
carbides, which form when carbon bonds to a less electronegative element, are represented by dozens of synthetic compounds that have a range of industrial applications (ettmayer and lengauer 1994).
the international mineralogical association has recognized 10 different naturally occurring carbide minerals (tables 2 and 3; http://rruff.info/ima/).
although rare and volumetrically trivial as reservoirs of carbon in the crust, they may represent a significant volume of carbon in earth’s deep interior, and thus may provide insight to the deep carbon cycle (dasgupta 2013; wood et al.
2013).
all metal carbides are refractory minerals; they have relatively high solidus and liquidus temperatures, with melting points typically above 2400 °c (nadler and kempter 1960; lattimer and grossman 1978).
a number of these minerals are found in association with diamond and other high-pressure phases, as well as with assemblages of unusual reduced minerals, including native al, fe, si, sn, w, and more than a dozen other native metallic elements, as well as exotic sulfides, phosphides, and silicides (table 4).
carbides, along with diamond, may thus represent earth’s deepest surviving minerals, and may prove a relatively unexplored window on the nature of the deep mantle environment and the deep carbon cycle.
moissanite.
moissanite (α−sic), also known commercially as carborundum when sold as an abrasive (hardness 9.5), is the most common of the natural carbides.
produced synthetically for more than a century (acheson 1893), moissanite is used in numerous applications, including automobile parts (e.g., brakes and clutches), bulletproof vests, light-emitting diodes, semiconductor components, anvils for high-pressure research and, since 1998, it has been marketed as inexpensive diamond-like artificial gemstones (bhatnagar and baliga 1993; xu and mao 2000; madar 2004; saddow and agarwal 2004).
since its discovery in 1893 by henri moissan in mineral residues from the canyon diablo meteor crater in arizona (moissan 1904b), natural moissanite has been found in dozens of localities, including meteorites, serpentinites, chromitites, ophiolite complexes, and in close association with diamond in kimberlites and eclogites (lyakhovich 1980; leung et al.
1990; alexander 1990, 1993; di pierro et al.
2003; lee et al.
2006; qi et al.
2007; xu et al.
2008; trumbull et al.
2009; shiryaev et al 2011; see also http://mindat.org).
while some occurrences of moissanite are apparently of near-surface origin, including sites of forest fires and contact metamorphism of silicate magmas with coal beds (sameshima and rodgers 1990), silicon carbide also represents one of the deepest mantle minerals known to reach the surface.
the discovery of moissanite inclusions in diamond (moore and gurney 1989; otter and gurney 1989; leung 1990; gorshkov et al.
1997), combined with observations of native silicon and fe-si alloy inclusions in moissanite (trumbull et al.
2009), may point to an origin in reduced mantle microenvironments.
however, further research is required to determine the range of oxygen fugacities under which moissanite is stable at mantle pressures and temperatures.
occurrences of silicon carbide in mantle-derived kimberlites and several ophiolite complexes reflect its stability at high pressure and very low oxygen fugacity (mathez et al.
1995).
secondary ion mass spectrometric (sims) analysis shows that ophiolite-hosted moissanite has a distinctive 13c-depleted isotopic composition (δ13c from − 18 to − 35‰, n = 36), which is significantly lighter than the main carbon reservoir in the upper mantle (δ13c near − 5‰).
alternatively, significant isotope fractionation between carbide and diamond has been observed in high-pressure experiments (-7 per mil at 5 gpa; mikhail et al.
2010; mikhail 2011), greatly complicating the potential for identification of carbon reservoirs through carbon isotope systematics of mantle-derived samples (mikhail et al.
2011).
it has been suggested that moissanite may also occur in the lower mantle, where the existence of 13c-depleted carbon is strongly supported by studies of extraterrestrial carbon (trumbull et al.
2009).
moissanite, like diamond, also forms by vapor deposition (hough et al.
1997) and it is relatively common in space in the envelopes of carbon-rich agb stars.
it is subsequently carried as a pre-solar guest in carbonaceous chondrites.
the origins of moissanite and other carbides have been inferred from unusual variations in both c-isotopes and n-isotopes (daulton et al.
2003).
meteoritic carbides commonly contain dissolved nitrogen, while the comparable family of nitride minerals [e.g., osbornite (tin)] contains some dissolved carbon.
this mutual limited solubility of n-c in minerals persists through natural diamond (c), which also contains minor n, and in the future may be useful for understanding crystallization histories and source reservoirs.
moissanite is also relatively widely distributed as micro-crystals in the ejecta from some meteorite impact craters formed in continental crust, and it may be associated with impact diamond and a variety of iron silicides like suessite (ernston et al.
2010).
low-pressure sic is also found in the kt impact layer (hough et al.
1995; langenhorst and deutsch 2012), though unlike impact diamond, sic is not ubiquitous in crustal impact deposits (gilmour et al.
2003).
indeed, another possibility for deep sic formation, given the antiquity of some kimberlite/diamond hosted sic, might be residues from giant impact processes during formation of earth’s moon, since at that time materials from a cross-section through the upper mantle were violently exposed to the vacuum of space.
ideal moissanite has a hexagonal structure closely related to that of lonsdaleite (and identical to wurtzite), in which every atom is tetrahedrally coordinated and corner-linked tetrahedral layers are stacked ideally in a two-layer […abab…] configuration (figure 5; rotating structure 4).
the si-c distance of 1.86 å is appreciably longer than that of the carbon polymorphs because of the greater size of si compared to c. moissanite is known to recrystallize at temperatures between 1400 and 1600 oc to β-sic, which is cubic and similar to the diamond structure.
more than 250 stacking polytypes of sic have been documented, notably hexagonal forms with 4-layer (4h) and 6-layer (6h—the most common terrestrial polytype; capitani et al.
2007) repeats {[…abac…] and […abcacb…], respectively}, and a rhombohedral form with a 15-layer (15r) sequence […abcbacabacbcacb…].
hundreds of other polytypes with repeat sequences from dozens to hundreds of layers (i.e., 141r and 393r) have also been characterized (krishna and verma 1965; lee et al.
2006; capitani et al.
2007; shiryaev et al.
2011; see also http://img.chem.ucl.ac.uk/www/kelly/literaturesicweb.htm#4 and http://mindat.org).
such complex polytypes have inspired a variety of models related to possible growth models, including screw dislocation or spiral growth mechanism (e.g., frank 1949, 1951; verma and krishna 1966), the faulted matrix model (pandey and krishna 1975a, 1975b, 1978), one-dimensional disorder theory (jagodzinski 1954a, 1954b), and the axial nearest neighbor ising model (price and yeomans 1984).
a curious crystal chemical aspect related to silicon carbide is the apparent absence of si-c bonding in other naturally occurring compounds (nawrocki 1997; franz 2007; tran et al.
2011).
chemists have explored a rich landscape of synthetic organic silanes, silanols, and silicones, but natural examples of these potentially crystal-forming compounds have not yet been described.
cohenite.
the iron carbide cohenite [(fe,ni,co)3c], also called cementite when it occurs as a binding agent in steel, is second in abundance as a natural carbide only to moissanite.
in nature cohenite is known primarily as an accessory mineral from more than a dozen iron meteorites (brett 1967), but it also occurs occasionally with native iron in the crust, for example at disko island in central west greenland, and the urals in russia.
though iron carbides are rare in nature, the low-pressure phase behavior of carbon in iron has been studied extensively by the steel industry (e.g., brooks 1996).
iron carbide occurs occasionally with native iron in the crust.
for example, local occurrences of metallic iron with iron carbide (“cohenite”) may result from thermal interaction and reduction of basalt with coal or other carbon-rich sediments (melson and switzer 1966; pederson 1979, 1981; cesnokov et al.
1998).
most famously, fe-ni carbide (ni-poor cohenite) occurs in massive native iron, with schreibersite, sulphides and a variety of minerals in graphite-bearing glassy tertiary basalts on and around disko island, greenland (individual iron masses > 20 tons; nordenskiöld 1872; pauly 1969; bird and weathers 1977; goodrich 1984; goodrich and bird 1985).
a further 10 ton mass was discovered as recently as 1985, 70 km away from the original disko iron location (ulff-moller 1986).
comparable massive and dispersed native iron containing not only iron carbide but also silicon carbide (h-6, moissanite), occurs together with a rich variety of more than 40 minerals including native metals (al, cu), in glass-bearing permian doleritic sills on the putorana plateau, siberia (oleynikov et al.
1985).
1985 these occurrences are partly brecciated and, although superficially resembling meteoritic textures, they are considered to be terrestrial (treiman et al.
2002).
the origin of the disko iron is still debated: detailed mapping of dispersed iron in regional basalts strongly favors large-scale interaction of carbon-rich sediments with volcanic lavas (larsen and pedersen 2009).
however, their correlation with basal stratigraphic units on the nussussuaq peninsula that preserve unambiguous ir-bearing impact spherules has reintroduced the prospect for involvement of a meteorite impact in the origin of carbon-rich disko iron (jones et al.
2005) as originally invoked by its discoverer (nordenskiöld 1872).
the structure of cohenite, (orthorhombic; space group pbnm, a = 4.518 å; b = 5.069 å; c = 6.736 å; hendricks 1930), has been extensively studied.
many samples display different cell parameters, potentially related to a variety of causes such as quenching rates.
the structure is composed of regular trigonal prisms of iron atoms with carbon at the center (figure 6; rotating structure 5).
(note that in the first structure experiments it was reported that cohenite features a framework of near regular cfe6 octahedra, each with 6 iron atoms surrounding a central carbon atom.
however, the positions of the carbon atoms were not determined and the assumption of octahedral coordination was incorrect.
)
new carbides from chinese ultramafic rocks.
two natural occurrences of exotic carbides deserve special note, because they point to a possibly rich and as yet largely unexplored deep carbide mineralogy.
the first localities are associated with ultramafic rocks in central china: (1) in podiform chromitites of the luobusha ophiolite complex, autonomous tibetan region; (2) within the mengyin kimberlite field, linyi prefecture; (3) within the yangliuping n-cu-pge deposit, sichuan province; and (4) at liu village, henan province.
these deposits incorporate minor amounts of three carbides that are unknown from any other region: qusongite (wc; fang et al.
2009; shi et al.
2009), yarlongite [(fe4cr4ni)c4; nicheng et al.
2005, 2008], and tongbaite (cr3c2; tian et al.
1983; dai et al.
2004).
the association of these carbides with moissanite, cohenite, and khamrabaevite [(ti,v,fe)c], as well as other dense, high-temperature phases such as diamond, coesite (a high-pressure form of sio2), and varied native metals, including fe, ni, w, cr, pb, and w, points to a high-temperature, high-pressure origin in a reduced mantle environment (robinson et al.
2001; shi et al.
2009).
new carbides from placer deposits of the urals.
a second enigmatic carbide region is found in the ural mountains of russia, within both the avorinskii placer, baranchinsky massif, and in sediments of the neiva river near verkhneivinsk.
placer deposits have yielded <0.3 mm-diameter grains of isovite [(cr,fe)23c6; generalov et al.
1998], as well as euhedral crystals from the complex nonstoichiometric solid solution between niobocarbide and tantalocarbide [(nb,ta)c1-x; gusev et al.
1996; novgorodova et al.
1997].
all known specimens of the latter two minerals, however, were collected early in the 20th century and the exact location of the placer deposit is currently unknown.
these two possibly related placer deposits produce an enigmatic suite of other unusual minerals, including native rhenium and osmium (both with melting temperatures > 3000°c), anyuite [au(pb,sb)2], and jedwabite [fe7(ta,nb)3].
the source lithologies and paragenesis of these minerals are not known, though the concentration of nb and ta suggests a possible association with carbonatitic magmas.
in any case, they point to the potential diversity of rare carbides in unusual geochemical environments.
rhombohedral carbonates
by far the most abundant carbon-bearing minerals, both in the number of different species and in their total crustal volume, are the carbonates, of which more than 300 have received ima approval (http://rruff.info/ima/; figure 7).
several previous compilations have reviewed carbonate minerals in detail (reeder 1983a; klein and hurlbut 1993; chang et al.
1997).
here we summarize key aspects of the mineralogy and crystal chemistry of select carbonates (tables 5 and 6).
almost all of these minerals incorporate near-planar (co3)2- anions, with an equilateral triangle of oxygen atoms around the central carbon atom.
most c-o bond distances are between 1.25 and 1.31 å and o-c-o angles are close to 120 degrees.
rigid-body libration of these molecular anions contributes to distinctive characteristics of carbonate vibrational spectra, notably three prominent infrared absorption features at ~690-750, 840-900, and 1400-1490 cm-1 (adler and kerr 1963; white 1974; chang et al.
1997) and the strong symmetric stretching modes found near 1100 cm-1 in raman spectra (rutt and nicola 1974).
two types of rhombohedral carbonates—the calcite and dolomite groups—collectively represent by far the most abundant carbonate minerals in earth’s crust, with calcite (caco3) and dolomite [camg(co3)2] in massive sedimentary and metamorphic formations accounting for at least 90% of crustal carbon (reeder 1983b).
orthorhombic carbonates in the aragonite group also play a significant role in earth surface processes (speer 1983), particularly through biomineralization (stanley and hardie 1998; dove et al.
2003; knoll 2003).
these three groups are surveyed below.
calcite and the calcite group.
the most important carbonate minerals belonging to the calcite group (table 5; reeder 1983b) include calcite (caco3), magnesite (mgco3), rhodocrosite (mnco3), siderite (feco3), and smithsonite (znco3).
it should be emphasized that these minerals seldom occur as pure end-members, but instead commonly form solid solutions with many divalent cations.
the calcite structure (space group r{bar3}c; e.g., bragg 1914; effenberger et al.
1981; chang et al.
1997) has a topology similar to that of nacl, with each ca2+ coordinated to 6 (co3)2- groups, and each (co3)2- group in turn coordinated to 6 ca2+ cations.
however, the orientations of the (co3)2- groups, while the same within each layer, are 180° out of phase in successive layers, thus doubling the repeat distance in the c axial direction relative to a sodium chloride analog.
note that this layer-by-layer alternation of (co3)2- group orientations results in an oxygen atom distribution that approximates hexagonal close packing, with c and ca occupying 3- and 6-coordinated interstices, respectively (megaw 1973).
the flattened shape of this carbonate anion results in an obtuse rhombohedral angle of 101°55' (figure 8; rotating structure 6).
calcite is widely distributed in earth’s crust; it appears most commonly within sedimentary rocks, where it occurs as the principal mineral of limestone, and as a natural cementing agent in many siliceous sandstone and shale units that were deposited under marine conditions.
calcite also dominates some metamorphic rocks such as marble and calcareous gneiss; occurs widely in hydrothermal systems, where it forms extensive vein networks; and is common in some unusual carbonate-rich igneous rocks such as carbonatites (jones et al.
2013).
although widely formed under earth’s near-surface conditions, distributions of calcite and other rhombohedral carbonate minerals have varied significantly through earth history, principally as a consequence of feedbacks between the geosphere and biosphere (knoll 2003; hazen et al.
2008; hazen et al.
2013).
at present, the majority of calcium carbonate deposition occurs as calcite precipitated within shallow marine settings.
in these settings, magnesium—whose concentration is nearly 4x that of calcium in normal marine fluids—is readily incorporated into the calcite crystal lattice, with mg concentrations of marine calcites equal to a few to nearly 20 mole % mgco3 (mackenzie et al.
1983; morse and mackenzie 1990; morse et al.
2006; berner and berner 2012).
such mg-bearing calcites are commonly referred to as magnesian calcite or “high mg calcite” (hmc) and are distinguished from calcites with low mg concentrations (“low mg calcite” or lmc).
magnesium is one of a suite of divalent ions that ready co-precipitate with calcium in the calcite lattice.
because ionic co-precipitation reflects a combination of the ionic availability, temperature, and lattice structure, and because it can substantially affect the solubility and rate of dissolution of the resultant calcite, differential co-precipitation of ions within calcite has been, and continues to be a subject of intense investigation as a means of unraveling the geologic history of the oceanic system (morse and mackenzie 1990).
one of calcite’s remarkable and as yet largely unexplored features is its extraordinary range of crystal forms (e.g., dana 1958).
habits range from the more common rhombohedral and scalenohedral crystal forms, to needle-like, platy, and equant shapes with expression of at least 300 different documented crystal forms (figure 9; see also specimen photographs on http://mindat.org).
some of the most varied crystal habits are widely distributed in association with both biological skeletalization (fallini et al.
1996; dove et al.
2003) and speleogenesis (frisia et al.
2000) and reflect a complex array of physical, chemical, and biological influences during crystallization.
because calcite crystal morphology is strongly affected by the kinetics of crystal growth, unraveling the differential effects of fluid saturation state, carbonate ion availability, ionic activity, the presence or absence of ionic inhibitors to nucleation and growth, and even the presence or absence of mineral catalyzing organic molecules (e.g., cody and cody 1991; teng and dove 1997; teng et al.
1998; orme et al.
2001), is critical to reveal as of yet untapped insights to earth’s crustal evolution.
this need to document connections between environment and crystal form may be true, in particular, for our understanding of distinct carbonate morphologies such as “herringbone” calcite (sumner and grotzinger 1996; kah et al.
1999) and “molar-tooth” calcite (pollock et al.
2006) that show distinct environmental distributions through earth history (see hazen et al.
2013).
other calcite group minerals.
the magnesium carbonate magnesite (mgco3) forms primarily through alteration of mg-rich igneous and metamorphic rocks, commonly in association with serpentine, as well as by direct precipitation from mg-rich solutions and as a primary phase in mantle-derived carbonatites.
anhydrous magnesium carbonate commonly hydrates to form one of several secondary minerals (table 6), including hydromagnesite [mg4(co3)3(oh)2.3h2o], artinite [mg2co3(oh)2·3h2o], dypingite [mg5(co3)4(oh)2·5h2o],  pokrovite [mg2co3(oh)2], nesquehonite (mgco3.3h2o), and landsfordite (mgco3.5h2o).
rhodochrosite, the manganese carbonate (mnco3), most commonly occurs as a vein-filling phase in hydrothermal ore districts.
limited solid solutions with ca, fe, and mg end-members, as well as zn, ba, and pb, are typical, as is partial alteration to manganese oxide hydroxides.
rhodochrosite is typically pale pink in color, though relatively rare deep rose pink specimens occur occasionally and are highly prized as semi-precious gemstones.
the iron carbonate siderite (feco3) occurs in massive beds as an important component of some precambrian banded iron sedimentary formations (klein 2005), as well as in hydrothermal veins associated with ferrous metal sulfides.
siderite commonly incorporates ca, mn, and co, and it forms a complete solid solution with magnesite in a variety of lithological settings, as well as with smithsonite (znco3) in hydrothermal lead-zinc ore deposits.
siderite is only stable under conditions of relatively low fo2 (hazen et al.
2013).
it is metastable under ambient oxic conditions and typically decomposes to a suite of iron oxide-hydroxides such as goethite [feo(oh)], and related hydrous phases [feo(oh).nh2o]—reactions that are accelerated by chemolithoautotrophic microbial activity.
dolomite group.
the dolomite group (space group r{bar3}) is topologically identical to calcite, but in these double carbonate minerals two or more different cations occupy alternate layers perpendicular to the c axis (wasastjerna 1924; wyckoff and merwin 1924; reeder 1983b; chang et al.
1997; figure 10; rotating structure 7).
important end-member minerals in this group (table 5) include dolomite [camg(co3)2], ankerite [femg(co3)2], kutnohorite [camn(co3)2], and minrecordite [cazn(co3)2].
note that in both the calcite and dolomite mineral groups the (co3)2- anions lie perpendicular to the rhombohedral c axis and they librate with a helical motion along this axis (gunasekaran et al.
2006; figure 11; animated figure with librating co3]).
the planar orientation of the co32- anions in the calcite and dolomite group minerals results in many of their distinctive properties, for example in their extreme optical anisotropy (maximum and minimum refractive indices differ by ~0.2 in these minerals), which causes the familiar double refraction seen through calcite cleavage rhombohedra.
the near-perfect [104] cleavage of calcite and dolomite group minerals also arises from anisotropies in bonding; this cleavage plane results in the minimum number of broken ca-o bonds and no broken c-o bonds.
strong bonding in the plane parallel to the co32- anions (i.e., the a axis of the hexagonal setting) compared to weaker ca-o bonds in the perpendicular direction (the c axis of the hexagonal setting) leads to extreme anisotropy in calcite’s thermal expansion, as well.
the c-axis thermal expansion is positive ~ +3.2 x 10-5 °c-1, whereas a-axis thermal expansion is negative ~ –0.3 x 10-5 °c-1 (markgraf and reeder 1985).
note, however, that in magnesite and dolomite the shorter, stronger mg-o bonds result in thermal expansion that is positive in both a and c axial directions.
dolomite is by far the most abundant species among the dolomite group minerals.
it forms primarily within both sedimentary and metamorphic deposits through the diagenetic replacement of calcite during interaction with mg-rich fluids.
phase relations in the caco3-mgco3-feco3 system, including the phases calcite, magnesite, siderite, and dolomite, as well as magnesian calcite, as summarized by chang et al.
(1997), reveal extensive regions in pressure-temperature-composition space of coexisting calcite group and dolomite group minerals—a topology that is borne out by the common association of calcite and dolomite in sedimentary rocks.
ankerite and kutnahorite are fe2+- and mn2+-bearing dolomites, respectively, with near-continuous solid solutions observed among the mg, fe, and mn end-members (essene 1983).
these phases occur most commonly as a result of hydrothermal alteration of calcite by reduced fluids rich in fe2+ and mn2+.
the aragonite group
a large number of caco3 polymorphs enrich carbonate mineralogy (carlson 1983; chang et al.
1997).
the aragonite group, which includes the aragonite form of caco3 plus cerussite (pbco3), strontianite (srco3), and witherite (baco3), prevail in carbonates that contain cations with ionic radii as large or larger than calcium.
the crystal structure of aragonite (speer 1983; figure 12; rotating structure 8), first determined by bragg (1924), is orthorhombic with the standard space group pnam (with c < a < b).
however, the structure is more conveniently described in a non-standard orientation with a < c < b, resulting in space group pmcn.
the structure in this orientation possesses alternating (001) layers of divalent metal cations and (co3)2- anions.
two types of (co3)2- layers (c1 and c2) alternate with two orientations of metal cations (a and b) in a stacking sequence […ac1bc2…] (speer 1983).
each (co3)2- anion is coordinated to 6 divalent metal atoms, and each metal atom is coordinated to 9 oxygen atoms (figure 12a).
aragonite is a denser polymorph of caco3 than calcite (2.95 versus 2.71 g/cm3), and has been recognized as a mineral characteristic of relatively high-pressure, low-temperature metamorphic environments (mckee 1962; coleman and lee 1962; ernst 1965).
aragonite, however, is also one of the predominant carbonate minerals—along with calcite and dolomite—that comprise the vast amount of carbon mineralization in earth’s surface environments.
although aragonite is the least stable of these minerals, and undergoes rapid recrystallization to thermodynamically more stable forms, it has been recognized as a fundamental constituent of marine depositional environments since at least the archean (sumner and grotzinger 2004), and represents a primary shallow-marine depositional facies throughout the proterozoic (grotzinger and read 1983; bartley and kah 2004; kah and bartley 2011).
furthermore, since the onset of enzymatic biomineralization, more than 500 million years ago, aragonite has been a primary constituent of the fossil record, forming metastable skeletons of some calcareous algae (bathurst 1976) as well as the skeletal components of a variety of invertebrates, including a wide variety of molluscs, scleractinian corals, and some bryozoans (cloud 1962; rucker and carver 1969; knoll 2003; dove 2010).
three other aragonite group minerals, the sr, ba, and pb carbonates strontianite, witherite, and cerussite, respectively, are all found primarily in relatively low-temperature hydrothermal or supergene environments, commonly associated with sulfates and metal sulfide ores (smith 1926; mitchell and pharr 1961; mamedov 1963; speer 1977; dunham and wilson 1985; wang and li 1991).
strontianite, in particular, has also been found in association with enzymatic biomineralization, with strontianite comprising nearly 40% of the skeletal carbonate in some scleractinian corals (mcgreegor et al.
1997), although it is uncertain whether strontianite in this case is primary or an early diagenetic phase resulting from recrystallization along the metastable strontianite-aragonite solid solution (plummer et al.
1992).
phase diagrams for the aragonite polymorphs of caco3 and other calcite group minerals underscore the effects of divalent cation coordination number on carbonate structure type.
several calcite group minerals transform to the aragonite structure at high pressure (carlson 1983; yoshioka and kitano 2011); conversely, the aragonite group minerals strontianite and witherite transform to the calcite structure at high temperature (chang 1965).
other anhydrous carbonates
more than 90 anhydrous carbonates other than the above mentioned rhombohedral and orthorhombic species have been described, though only a handful of these diverse phases are common (table 5; http://rruff.info/ima/).
of these minerals, vaterite, huntite, and several minerals associated with carbonatites deserve special note.
vaterite.
vaterite is a polymorph of caco3 that is unstable under ambient conditions, yet plays an important role in biomineralization.
nanocrystalline vaterite rapidly converts to calcite, but can be stabilized indefinitely by a variety of hydrophilic organic molecules.
vaterite’s critical role in biomineralization arises from the low energy required for its conversion to other crystalline forms (xu et al.
2006; soldati et al.
2008; wehrmeister et al.
2012).
therefore, it is the preferred mineral phase (along with amorphous calcium carbonate, or acc) for storing material critical to skeletal growth.
typically, metazoans process nan-aggregates of vaterite (or acc; addadi et al.
2003) to form mesoscale syntaxial structures, which may provide an energetically favorable pathway to the construction of larger skeletal elements (e.g., single-crystal echinoderm plates).
details of the vaterite crystal structure, which must be analyzed using nano-scale powders by x-ray or electron diffraction methods, remains in doubt.
it was once thought to be hexagonal (space group p63/mmc; a = 7.135 å; c = 16.98 å; kahmi 1963).
however, le bail et al.
(2011) found evidence for an orthorhombic structure with 3-fold cyclic twinning (space group ama2; a = 8.472 å; b = 7.158 å; c = 4.127 å; z = 4).
by contrast, mugnaioli et al.
(2012) propose a monoclinic unit cell (a = 12.17 å, b = 7.12 å, c = 9.47 å, ß = 118.94º), which is a geometric transformation of the smallest hexagonal cell proposed by kamhi (1963).
all studies agree that vaterite features ca in distorted 7 or 8 coordination, with an octahedron of 6 ca-o bonds at ~2.4 å, and two longer ca-o bonds at >2.9 å (figure 13; rotating structure 9]).
thus, calcium coordination in vaterite is intermediate between that of calcite (6) and aragonite (9).
wang and becker (2009) employed first-principles calculations and molecular dynamics simulations to elucidate details of the vaterite structure and co32- group orientations.
previous studies had suggested rotational disorder among carbonate groups, but wang and becker (2009) demonstrate a more stable configuration with an ordered co32- superstructure.
vaterite is commonly rotationally disordered when first crystallized, but it can achieve carbonate orientational order through annealing.
huntite.
huntite [camg3(co3)4] occurs as a low-temperature mineral, both by direct precipitation from aqueous solutions enriched in mg and as an alteration product of dolomite or magnesite (kinsman 1967).
its hexagonal structure (space group r32; a = 9.503 å; c = 7.821 å) bears some similarities to rhombohedral carbonates.
magnesium is in octahedral coordination in all of these carbonates, but calcium in huntite is in trigonal prismatic coordination, as opposed to octahedral coordination in calcite, dolomite, and other species (dollase and reeder 1986; figure 14 [rotating structure 10]).
carbonatite carbonate mineralogy.
finally, a number of exotic carbonate minerals are found associated with carbonatites, which are defined as igneous rocks (extrusive or intrusive) with greater than 50 percent carbonate minerals (tuttle and gittins 1966; bell 1989; jones et al.
2013).
these rare mantle-derived magmas are stable over a wide temperature range and can erupt as remarkably cool surface lavas at ~500 to 600°c (dawson et al.
1990; church and jones 1995).
carbonatites encompass a range of compositions, including those dominated by calcite (ca), dolomite (ca-mg), ankerite (ca-fe), and alkali (na-k+ca) carbonate minerals.
furthermore, these magmas are often enriched in an unusual suite of elements in addition to carbon: alkalis, alkaline earths, fluorine, phosphorus, rare earth elements, and niobium (deans 1966).
as a result of these chemical complexities, approximately 30 different carbonate minerals have been identified from these varied sources (kapustin 1980; chang et al.
1997).
several of the rhombohedral carbonates are found commonly in carbonatites, including calcite, magnesite, siderite, rhodochrosite, and dolomite, as well as orthorhombic aragonite and strontianite (garson and morgan 1978; kapustin 1980; dziedzic and ryka 1983).
these familiar minerals are accompanied by a number of exotic double carbonates include alstonite and barytocalcite [both polymorphs of caba(co3)2], norsethite [bamg(co3)2], and the rare earth carbonates burbankite [(na,ca)3(sr,ba,ce)3(co3)5], sahamalite-(ce) [ce2mg(co3)4] and carbocernaite [(ca,na)(sr,ce,la)(co3)2].
note that reference is sometimes made to “breunnerite” [(mg,fe)co3], but this fe-rich magnesite is not a valid mineral species.
the alkali carbonatites are exemplified by oldoinyo lengai in tanzania (the only currently active carbonatite volcano), and feature several minerals with the general formula [(na,k)2ca(co3)2] (dawson 1962, 1966; chang et al.
1997).
the two sodium-rich end-members are nyerereite (typically with na/k ~4.5, though the official ima chemical formula lacks k) and a possible higher-temperature polymorph zemkorite (with na/k ~6.2; again, the official ima-approved formula lacks k); potassium end-member species are fairchildite and a lower-temperature form, bütschliite (dawson 1962; mrose et al.
1966; mckie and frankis 1977; yergorov et al.
1988; chang et al.
1997).
these phases are also accompanied by the rare sodium carbonate gregoryite [na2(co3)], which can only form in alkali-rich, alkaline earth-poor systems.
carbonatites can also develop suites of rare earth element (ree) carbonate or carbonate-fluoride minerals, including the bastnäsite group [ree(co3)f, found with dominant ree = ce, la, nd, or y], synchysite and parasite [both caree(co3)2f, found with dominant ree = ce, nd, or y]], huanghoite-(ce) [ba(ce,ree)(co3)2f], and the cordylite group [nabaree2(co3)4f, found with dominant ree = ce or la].
ree-carbonatites are often geologically associated with u and th minerals (ruberti et al 2008; see also uranyl carbonates below).
two of the world’s largest economic ore bodies for ree are carbonatites: mountain pass california (age 1.37 ga; olson et al.
1954; jones and wyllie 1986; castor 2008) and bayan obo, china (age 1.35 ga: le bas et al.
1992; yang et al.
2011).
finally, several hydrous carbonates, including the uncommon ree phases of the ancylite group [(ca,sr,pb)(ree)(co3)2(oh).h2o, found with dominant ree = ce, la, or nd], calkinsite-(ce) [(ce,ree)2(co3)2.4h2o], and the lanthanite group [ree2(co3)3·8h2o, found with dominant ree = ce, la, or nd], along with two closely associated hydrated mg-al carbonates, manasseite [mg6al2(co3)(oh)16·4h2o] and hydrotalcite [mg6al2(co3)(oh)16·4h2o], have been reported from some carbonatites (kapustin 1980).
hydrous carbonates
most carbon-bearing minerals—more than 210 of the approximately 320 ima approved carbonate species—are hydrated or hydrous (table 6; http://rruff.info/ima/).
these diverse species, whose classification has been systematized by mills et al.
(2009), occupy numerous specialized near-surface niches but are for the most part volumetrically minor.
most of these diverse minerals have mixed anionic groups, including more than 30 carbonate-sulfates, more than 40 carbonate-silicates, and more than 20 carbonate-phosphates, plus carbonates with uranyl, arsenate, borate, and other ionic groups, which represent near-surface alteration products of other minerals (see tables 5 and 6 for some of the more common representative examples).
malachite and azurite.
the common hydrous copper carbonates, malachite [cu2(oh)2co3] and azurite [cu3(oh)2(co3)2], which form in the oxidized zone of copper deposits, are typical of a large number of near-surface carbonate phases, including more than 20 other hydrous copper carbonates.
these colorful minerals are among the thousands of mineral species that hazen et al.
(2008) identified as potentially biologically mediated (hazen et al.
2013).
uranyl carbonates.
at least 30 carbonates incorporate the (uo2)2+ uranyl cation group.
these fascinating and colorful phases, which commonly form as alteration products of near-surface uranium ore bodies, include 4 anhydrous carbonates: rutherfordine [(uo2)(co3)], the isomorphous alkali uranyl carbonates agricolite and čejkaite [k4(uo2)(co3)3 and na4(uo2)(co3)3, respectively], and widenmannite [pb2(uo2)(co3)3].
most of the hydrous and hydrated uranyl carbonates are rare; 20 of these species are documented from five or fewer localities (http://mindat.org), while only four of these hydrated uranium carbonate species are known from more than 30 localities: andersonite [na2ca(uo2)(co3)3·6h2o], bayleyite [mg2(uo2)(co3)3(h2o)12·6h2o], liebigite [ca2(uo2)(co3)3·11h2o], and schrockingerite [naca3(uo2)(so4)(co3)3f·10h2o].
these minerals are all ca or mg carbonates that presumably formed by alteration of calcite or dolomite in a relatively oxidized subsurface environment—conditions that must significantly postdate the great oxidation event (hazen et al.
2008, 2009; sverjensky and lee 2010; hazen et al.
2013).
hydrated calcium carbonates.
in addition to the mineralogically complex hydrated carbonates outlined above, hydrated phases of calcium carbonate {i.e., ikaite [caco3·6h2o] and its pseudomorphs [which have been given a number of unofficial varietal names such as thinolite, glendonite, jarrowite, and fundylite (browell 1860; dana 1884; shearman and smith 1985; ito 1996; swainson and hammond 2001)], plus monohydrocalcite (caco3.h2o) and hydromagnesite [mg5(co3)4(oh)2·4h2o]}, play critical roles in the near-surface co-evolution of the geosphere and biosphere.
hydrated calcite is common in modern microbial systems and commonly represents an initial precipitate phase within microbially mediated carbonate deposits.
similarly, pseudomorphs after ikaite provide thermodynamic indicators of cold marine temperatures, and can potentially be used as a unique indicator of glaciated conditions in the geologic past, for example, as pseudomorphs after ikaite in the mississippian of alberta, canada (brandley and krause 1997) and in glendonites in neoproterozoic shallow shelf environments (james et al.
1998).
minerals incorporating organic molecules
the ima has recognized approximately 50 organic minerals, and it is likely that many more species remain to be identified and described (table 7; http://rruff.info/ima).
these diverse phases fall into three main categories—organic molecular crystals, minerals with organic molecular anions, and clathrates.
note that while many of these minerals are a direct or indirect consequence of biological activity, some minerals with organic molecules may have a non-biological origin.
consequently, perry et al.
(2007) have also introduced the term “organomineral” to designate “mineral products containing organic carbon,” but “not directly produced by living cells.” as examples they cite carbon-bearing siliceous hot-spring deposits, desert varnish, stromatolites, and a variety of trace fossils.
organic molecular crystals.
organic molecular crystals encompass those carbon-bearing minerals in which electrically neutral organic molecules crystalize into a periodic arrangement, principally through van der waals interactions (table 7).
this diverse group includes a number of species known only as accessory minerals associated with coal; for example, 9 different hydrocarbon minerals, such as kratochvilite (c13h10), fichtelite (c19h34), dinite (c20h36), and evenkite (c24h48); acetamide (ch3conh2); and the ring-shaped nickel porphyrin mineral abelsonite, ni(c31h32n4).
burning coal mines also produce molecular crystals through sublimation, including kladnoite [c6h4(co)2nh] and hoelite (c14h8o2; jehlička et al.
2007).
other molecular crystals are unique to fossilized wood [flagstaffite (c10h22o3)]; roots [refikite (c20h32o2)]; or bat guano deposits in caves, for example the purines uricite (c5h4n4o3) and guanine (c5h5n5o), and urea [co(nh2)2].
it is intriguing to note that average temperatures on earth are too high for many crystals of small organic molecules to form, including crystalline forms of carbon dioxide (which has been observed near the poles of mars; byrne and ingersoll 2003), methane, ethane (c2h6), ethylene (c2h2), and propane (c3h8).
one can anticipate that these and many other such minerals await discovery in the cold, hydrocarbon-rich near-surface environment of saturn’s moon titan, as well as in the form of condensed phases in dense molecular clouds (glein 2012).
minerals with organic anions.
approximately 25 mineral species incorporate organic anions bonded to ca, mg, cu, na, and other metal cations (table 7).
predominant among these organic salt minerals are more than a dozen oxalates with the (c2o4)2- anion.
the most common oxalate is weddellite [ca(c2o4).2h2o], which is found in such varied environments as bat guano, sediments derived from lichens, human kidney stones, cactus (saguaro, carnegiea gigantea), and the depths of the weddell sea.
other oxalates include caoxite [ca(c2o4).3h2o], glushinskite [mg(c2o4).2h2o], humboldtine [fe(c2o4).2h2o], lindbergite [mn(c2o4).2h2o], natroxalate [na2(c2o4)], and oxammite [(nh4)2(c2o4).h2o] (the latter a biomineral known exclusively from guano deposits).
other organic anions in minerals include formate (hcoo)-1, for example in formicate [ca(choo)2] and dashkovite [mg(hcoo)2.2h2o]; acetyl (ch3coo)-1 in hoganite [cu(ch3coo)2.h2o] and calclacite [ca(ch3coo)cl.5h2o] (the latter mineral known only from specimens of limestone stored in wooden drawers); methyl sulfonate (ch3so3)-1 in ernstburkite [mg(ch3so3)2.12h2o]; and thiocyanate (scn)-1 in julienite [na2co(scn)4.8h2o].
finally, rastsvetaeva et al.
(1996) describe a cu2+ succinate monohydrate phase that occurs as a consequence of washing copper mineral specimens with detergents.
clathrate silicates.
clathrates comprise a third as yet poorly described group of minerals containing organic molecules.
these minerals feature open three-dimensional framework structures that incorporate molecules in cage-like cavities.
chibaite and melanophlogite are silica clathrates with open zeolite-like sio2 frameworks that may contain hydrocarbons from methane to butane (c4h10) as the guest molecule (skinner and appleman 1963; momma et al.
2011).
melanophlogite with co2 and/or methane as the guest molecule has been found in natrocarbonatite lavas at oldoinyo lengai (carmody thesis 2012).
clathrate hydrates.
water-based clathrates, also known as gas hydrates or clathrate hydrates, are remarkable crystalline compounds that form at low temperatures (typically < 0ºc) and elevated pressures (> 6 mpa).
these materials have attracted considerable attention because of their potential for applications to energy storage and recovery applications (max 2003; boswell 2009; koh et al.
2009, 2011).
different gas clathrate hydrate structure types have a variety of cage sizes and shapes, which depend primarily on the size and character of the gas molecule.
the principal documented natural clathrate hydrate mineral is an as yet unnamed methane hydrate commonly known as “methane ice, which crystallizes in marine sediments of the continental shelves or in permafrost zones below a depth of ~130 (hyndman and davis 1992).
methane hydrate is structurally similar to the silica clathrates.
its cubic structure (space group pm3m, a = 12 å) features a three-dimensional h2o framework with two types of cages partially filled with ch4 molecules: a pentagonal dodecahedron (designated 512, or a cage formed by 12 interconnected 5-member rings of h2o) and a tetrakaidecahedron (designated 51262), each with average radii ~4 å, each holding one ch4 molecule (figure 15; [rotating structure 10]).
although the methane content is variable, methane ice holds on average ~0.17 mole of methane per mole of water, corresponding to a density of ~0.9 g/cm3 (max 2003).
the geographic distribution of methane hydrate is extensive, with hundreds of confirmed deposits (hyndman and spence 1992; kvenvolden 1995; milkov 2004).
the total methane storage in clathrates was estimated by allison and boswell (2007) as 2 x 1016 m3—a quantity orders of magnitude greater than that represented by all other natural gas reserves.
annual natural gas consumption in north america, by comparison, is ~6 x 1011 m3 (boswell 2009).
in fact, the methane stored in clathrate hydrates may exceed the energy represented by known reserves of all other fossil fuels combined (kvenvolden 1995; grace et al.
2008).
in addition to this common phase, guggenheim and koster van groos (2003) and koster van groos and guggenheim (2009) have reported the synthesis of a possible new gas-hydrate phase that consists of a clay-methane hydrate intercalate.
in addition, chou et al.
(2000) have reported additional methane clathrate hydrate phases that occur exclusively at high pressures.
mineral-molecule interactions
finally, it should be noted that organic molecules often interact strongly with mineral surfaces, especially in aqueous environments (hazen 2006; jonsson et al.
2009; bahri et al.
2011; cleaves et al.
2011).
such interactions of organic species with mineral surfaces have received special attention for at least two reasons related to the biosphere.
first, a number of minerals have been invoked as possibly playing key roles in the origins of life through the selection, concentration, protection, and templating of biomolecules, as well as the possible catalysis of biomolecules (bernal 1951; goldschmidt 1952; orgel 1998; lahav 1999; schoonen et al.
2004; hazen 2005, 2006).
specific hypotheses focus on the roles of hydroxides (holm et al.
1993; pitsch et al.
1995; hill et al.
1998), quartz (bonner et al.
1974, 1975; evgenii and wolfram 2000), feldspars and zeolites (smith 1998; parsons et al.
1998; smith et al.
1999), carbonates (hazen et al.
2001), phosphates (weber 1982, 1995; acevedo and orgel 1986), borates (ricardo et al.
2004; grew et al.
2011), phosphides (pasek et al.
2007), and sulfides (wächtershäuser 1988, 1990, 1993; russell et al.
1994; russell and hall 1997; huber and wächtershäuser 1998; bebié and schoonen 2000; cody et al.
2000, 2001, 2004; cody 2004).
in this regard, clay minerals have received special attention for their potential ability to template and catalyze the polymerization of amino acids and nucleotides as steps in the origins of life (cairns-smith 1982, 2005; cairns-smith and hartman 1986; ferris et al.
1996; ertem and ferris 1996; orgel 1998; ferris 2005).
a second possible influence of mineral-molecule interactions on the biosphere also invokes clay minerals, which might have contributed significantly to the rise of atmospheric oxygen through the adsorption, concentration, and subsequent burial of significant amounts of organic matter from the terrestrial environment (kennedy et al.
2006).
this process of organic burial is one of the most efficient mechanisms for atmospheric oxidation (berner et al 2000; hayes and waldbauer 2006; hazen et al.
2013).
conclusions: unresolved questions in carbon mineralogy
more than two centuries of mineralogical research have revealed much regarding the varied c-bearing mineral phases in earth’s near-surface environment.
nevertheless, much remains to be learned.
among the most fundamental mineralogical questions—one evident from any museum display of carbonate minerals—is what physical, chemical, and biological processes lead to the remarkable range of calcite crystal forms?
no other crystalline phase exhibits such a wide range of morphologies.
what environmental factors influence calcite crystal forms?
and why don’t other rhombohedral carbonates display a similar variety?
studies of minerals that incorporate organic molecules are in their infancy, and numerous other phases at the interface between the crystalline and biological worlds are likely awaiting discovery.
characterization of such phases may prove especially important in resolving debates regarding abiotic versus biotic origins of some deep organic molecules (sephton and hazen 2013; mccollom 2013).
furthermore, organic mineralogy may play a dominant role on titan, as well as planets and moons in other c-rich star systems.
indeed, carbon mineralogy may provide one of the most sensitive geological indicators of the evolution and present state of other worlds.
figure captions
figure 1.
[rotating structure 1] graphite.
(a) the graphite  (native c) crystal structure (hexagonal, space group p63/mmc; a = 2.464 å; c = 6.736 å; z = 4) incorporates monoatomic layers of 3-coordinated carbon, linked by van der waals interactions.
(b) natural graphite crystals reflect the hexagonal crystal structure.
this 1 mm diameter crystal displays basal pinacoid and prism faces.
the crystal, associated with calcite, is from the crestmore quarries, riverside co., california.
photo courtesy of john a. jaszczak.
figure 2.
[rotating structure 2] (a) the diamond  (native c) crystal structure (cubic, space group fd3m; a = 3.560 å; z = 8) features a framework of tetrahedrally coordinated carbon atoms.
(b) a natural diamond crystal reflects the cubic crystal structure.
the semi-translucent diamond cube (ref.
no.
s014632) is 24.3 x 21.8 x 21.7 millimeters in size and weighs 156.381 carats (31.3 gm) and is shown with a 1-carat diamond for scale.
it is represented to be from ghana.
photo courtesy of harold and erica van pelt.
figure 3.
[rotating structure 3] the lonsdaleite (native c) crystal structure (hexagonal, space group p63/mmc; a = 2.52 å; c = 4.12 å; z = 4)
figure 4.
the carbon phase diagram (after hazen 1999).
figure 5.
[rotating structure 4] the moissanite (sic) crystal structure (hexagonal, space group p63mc; a = 3.081 å; c = 5.031 å; z = 2).
carbon and silicon atoms appear in blue and grey, respectively.
figure 6.
[rotating structure 5] the structure of the iron carbide cohenite [(fe,ni,co)3c] (orthorhombic, space group pbnm; a = 4.518 å, b = 5.069 å; c = 6.736 å; z = 4).
carbon and iron atoms appear in blue and gold, respectively.
figure 7.
the diversity of carbonate minerals.
(a) rhodochrosite (to come); (b) ankerite [cafe2+(co3)2] from brownley hill mine, nenthead, cumbria, england showing the typical curved saddle-shaped rhombohedral crystals.
photo courtesy of the rruff project; (c) artinite [mg2co3(oh)2·3h2o], divergent sprays of clear colorless acicular crystals from san benito county, california, usa.
photo courtesy of the rruff project; (d) aurichalcite [zn5(co3)2(oh)6], divergent sprays of light blue lathlike crystals from bisbee, cochise county, arizona, usa, photo courtesy of the rruff project; (e) hydromagnesite [mg5(co3)4(oh)2·4h2o], colorless bladed crystals from paradise range, nye county, nevada, usa, photo courtesy of the rruff project; (f) [jouravskite, ca3mn4+(so4)(co3)(oh)6·12h2o], yellow hexagonal prism associated with calcite from the wessels mine, kurumen, kalahari manganese fields, cape province, south africa, photo courtesy of the rruff project; (g) stichtite [mg6cr2co3(oh)16·4h2o], an aggregate of contorted purple plates from dundas, tasmania, australia, photo courtesy of the rruff project; (h) zaratite [ni3co3(oh)4·4h2o], green amorphous crust, intimately associated with népouite from lord brassy mine, tasmania, australia, photo courtesy of the rruff project.
figure 8.
[rotating structure 6]  the structure of calcite (caco3) (rhombohedral; space group r{bar3}c; hexagonal setting a = 4.989 å; c = 17.061 å; z = 6; rhombohedral setting a = 6.375; α = 46.1°; z = 2).
blue spheres are carbon atoms, with light green cao6 octahedra.
figure 9.
crystal forms of natural calcite.
(a) rhombohedral cleavage fragment of optical grade material from near presidio, texas, usa, university of arizona mineral museum 16674  (b) scalenohedrons collected in the early 1800’s from the bigrigg mine, cumbria, england.
bob downs specimen; (c) hexagonal prisms with rhombohedral terminations from joplin, missouri, usa uamm 16545; (d) herringbone growths of acicular crystals from the southwest mine, bisbee, arizona, usa, uamm 9499; (e) hexagonal prisms with pyrite centers from charcas, san luis potosi, mexico, uamm 1214; (f) stalactite globules from southwest mine, bisbee, arizona, usa, uamm 9499; (g) aggregate of bladed crystals from the onyx cave, santa rita mts, arizona, usa, uamm 5503; (h) hexagonal prisms with pyramidal terminations from thje camp bird mine, imogene basin, ouray county, colorado, usa, uamm 6703.
all photographs by alesha siegal, university of arizona.
figure 10.
[rotating structure 7]  dolomite.
(a) the structure of dolomite [mgca(co3)2] (rhombohedral; space group r{bar3}; hexagonal setting a = 4.807 å; c = 16.00 å; z = 3; rhombohedral setting a = 6.015, α = 47.1°; z = 1).
blue spheres are carbon atoms, with light green cao6 octahedra and dark green mgo6 octahedra.
(b) dolomite crystals reflect their rhombohedral crystal structure.
figure 11.
[animated figure] the rigid body librating co32- unit of the calcite and dolomite mineral groups.
blue and red ellipsoids represent carbon and oxygen atoms, respectively.
figure 12.
[rotating structure 8]  aragonite group.
(a) the structure of aragonite (caco3) (orthorhombic; space group pmcn; a = 4.960 å; b = 7.964 å; c = 5.738 å; z = 4).
blue spheres are carbon atoms, whereas green polyhedral are cao9 groups.
(b) the orthorhombic structure of aragonite is manifest in its common crystal form.
figure 13.
[rotating structure 9] the crystal structure of vaterite (caco3).
(hexagonal, space group p63/mmc; a = 7.135 å; c = 16.98 å; z = 16).
blue spheres and green polyhedral represent carbon and calcium-oxygen polyhedral, respectively.
figure 14.
[rotating structure 10] the structure of huntite [camg3(co3)4].
(hexagonal; space group r32; a = 9.503 å, c = 7.821 å; z = 3).
the huntite structure is unusual in the trigonal prism coordination of calcium, coupled with octahedral coordination of magnesium.
figure 15.
[rotating structure 10] methane hydrate.
(a) the structure of methane hydrate [h2o.ch4] (cubic; space group pm3m; a = 12 å).
(b) methane hydrate burns at room conditions, as the hydrate melts and methane is released.
table captions
table 1.
allotropes of native carbon.
table 2.
natural carbide minerals (data compiled from mindat.org locality and species databases).
table 3.
natural carbide locality register, with associated reduced and/or high-p mineral species (data compiled from mindat.org locality and species databases).
several moissanite localities of poorly-defined paragenesis are not included.
table 4.
select reduced and/or high-pressure mineral species associated with natural carbides (data compiled from mindat.org locality and species databases).
for locality key see table 3.
table 5.
selected anhydrous carbonates, primarily species with more than 10 known localities [http://mindat.org].
table 6.
selected hydrous carbonates.
table 7.
representative minerals incorporating organic molecules.
﻿   chapter 3: structure, bonding, and mineralogy of carbon at extreme conditions
introduction
the nature and extent of earth’s deep carbon cycle remains uncertain.
this chapter considers high-pressure carbon-bearing minerals, including those of earth’s mantle and core, as well as phases that might be found in the interiors of larger planets outside our solar system.
these phases include both experimentally produced and theoretically predicted polymorphs of carbon dioxide, carbonates, carbides, silicate-carbonates, as well as very high-pressure phases of pure carbon.
one theme in the search for possible high p-t, deep-earth phases is the likely shift from sp2 bonding (trigonal coordination) to sp3 bonding (tetrahedral coordination) in carbon-bearing phases of the lower mantle and core, as exemplified by the graphite-to-diamond transition (bundy et al.
1961; davies 1984).
a similar phenomenon has been documented in the preferred coordination spheres of many elements at high pressure.
for example, silicon is ubiquitously found in tetrahedral coordination in crustal and upper mantle minerals, but adopts octahedral coordination in many high-pressure phases.
indeed, the boundary between earth’s transition zone and lower mantle may be described as a crystal chemical shift from 4-coordinated to 6-coordinated silicon (hazen and finger 1978; finger and hazen 1991).
similarly, magnesium and calcium commonly occur in octahedral 6-coordination in minerals at ambient conditions, but transform to 8- or greater coordination in high-pressure phases, as exemplified by the calcite-to-aragonite transformation of caco3 and the pyroxene-to-perovskite and post-perovskite transformations of mgsio3 (murakami et al.
2004; oganov and ono 2004).
consequently, a principal focus in any consideration of deep-earth carbon minerals must include carbon in higher coordination, and even more complex bonding at more extreme conditions that characterize the interiors of larger planets.
theoretical considerations
we briefly review theoretical methods used to examine dense carbon-bearing minerals, focusing on first-principles or ab initio approaches.
to compute the energies, one can choose one among a hierarchy of theoretical approximations.
the energetics of the phases considered in this chapter have also been studied using quantum chemistry methods.
these approaches have been applied, for example, to pure carbon phases (guth 1990; che et al.
1999).
a leading approach is density functional theory (hohenberg and kohn 1964; kohn and sham 1965), which in principle is an exact quantum-mechanical theory, but in practice requires approximations, such as the lda (local density approximation: perdew and wang 1992).
early lda calculations proved successful in predicting the high-pressure behavior of carbon (e.g.
fahy et al.
1986; fahy and louie 1977)
recent extensions of the lda include gga (generalized gradient approximation: perdew et al.
1996), meta-gga (tao et al.
2003), or higher-level approximations currently under development.
the only approximate term in the equations is the exchange-correlation energy (the non-classical part of the electron-electron interaction energy), the most successful approximations of which are based on the properties of the electron gas, with more advanced approximations taking into account more non-local features, for example, gradient, laplacian, or orbital kinetic energy density.
the usual accuracy of such approximations as lda and gga is on the order of 1-2% for bond lengths and unit-cell parameters, where lda usually underestimates and gga overestimates bond lengths; ~15% for the elastic constants; and ~5% for vibrational frequencies.
for phase transitions and chemical reactions, the gga seems to perform much better than the lda, with phase transition pressures accurate to within ~5 gpa (usually overestimated); however, for metal-insulator transitions errors of both approximations are typically much larger.
for ionic and covalent materials and for normal metals (carbon allotropes and most carbonates and perhaps carbides belong to these classes) both lda and gga give good description of the structural properties and thermodynamics.
large errors in all compounds are documented for calculations of electronic excitation energies and band gaps (both lda and gga significantly underestimate band gaps); one must employ special methods, such as the gw method (aryasetiawan and gunnarsson 1998), to compute these parameters.
mott insulators represent a particular pathological case, where today’s dft too often gives unreasonable results.
until recently, dft calculations could not adequately account for van der waals interactions, but ways for incorporating these effects are now possible (dion et al.
2004; roman-perez and soler 2009).
given the high degree of thermodynamic equilibrium reached in earth’s deep interior due to high temperatures and long geological timescales, it often suffices in studies of mantle and core mineralogy to consider free energies of relevant chemical equilibria without accounting for kinetics.
the gibbs free energy g of a particular phase can be calculated as:
g =e + pv – ts =  f + pv = f -v()t,                        (1)
where p is the pressure, v the volume, t the temperature, s the entropy, f  is the helmholtz free energy, e0 is the ground-state energy (at 0 k), and en are the energy levels of the system:
f = e0 – kbt ln .
(2)
the sum within the logarithm in equation (2) is called the partition function, and its rigorous calculation is complicated owing to the difficulty in obtaining energy levels experimentally or theoretically for their overwhelmingly large number in solids.
in the simplest, harmonic, approximation these energy levels are:
en=(+n)ω,                             (3)
where n is the quantum number, ω the frequency of the vibration, and is the planck constant.
more sophisticated approximations exist, but the general point is that a knowledge of the energy landscape allows one to compute all thermodynamic properties, including the entropy.
predicting the most stable structure is a global optimization problem, and such problems are mathematically said to be of the np-hard class and cannot be solved with a guarantee.
to deal with such problems, one develops heuristic methods, the goal of which is to achieve high success rate and efficiency for a given class of problems.
a variety of methods exists for predicting structures (e.g., martoňák et al.
2003; oganov and glass 2006; oganov et al.
2010; pickard and needs 2011; for an overview of different methods see oganov 2010).
a large number of results for carbon-bearing phases under pressure (oganov et al.
2006, 2008; li et al.
2009; lyakhov and oganov 2011; wen et al.
2011; zhu et al.
2011, 2012a; bazhanova et al.
2012) have been obtained with the evolutionary algorithm uspex (oganov and glass 2006; oganov 2010; lyakhov et al.
2010; oganov et al.
2011).
a powerful computational method called evolutionary metadynamics has recently been developed by zhu et al.
(2012a).
this method, which merges features of the uspex method and metadynamics (martoňák et al.
2003), is capable of rapidly finding the ground state structure and a large number of low-energy metastable structures, provided a reasonable initial structure is provided.
as in the original metadynamics method, the new method produces meaningful structural transformation mechanisms.
however, equilibration is achieved not using molecular dynamics, which is prone to trapping in metastable states and often leads to amorphization during metadynamics simulations, but rather employs global optimization moves borrowed from the uspex method.
unlike original metadynamics, this technique produces extremely rich sets of low-energy crystal structures, while using less computer time.
particularly attractive is a possibility to determine the most likely crystal structure accessible from the initial structure through metastable transitions.
elemental carbon
one of the remarkable features of carbon is existence of a broad range of metastable phases that can be formed near ambient conditions and their wide fields of kinetic stability.
we consider both stable and metastable phases (fig.
1) as well as both equilibrium and metastable transitions among the phases, and predictions of carbon allotropes at very high pressures beyond those of earth.
this section includes a discussion of metastable transitions of the lower density phase.
not only do these structures provide useful insight into carbon crystal chemistry and bonding, but transitions to these phases also may be relevant to natural impact phenomena involving these phases in nature.
stable phases
the common naturally-occurring sp2 and sp3 allotropes of carbon occur in different crystallographic forms of graphite-like and diamond-like phases, respectively: hexagonal graphite and a rhombohedral stacking variant; as well as hexagonal lonsdaleite and cubic diamond (see hazen et al.
2013).
the large cohesive energy of diamond (717 kj/mol), together with significant energy barriers, gives rise to its high degree of metastability and extremely high melting temperature (5000 k).
the high activation barrier for a transformation between graphite and diamond explains why synthesis of diamond from graphite requires not only high pressures, but also high temperatures and often the presence of catalysts.
the structures and occurrences of naturally occurring carbon allotropes, including graphite, diamond, and lonsdaleite, are reviewed elsewhere in this volume (hazen et al.
2013).
here we focus on phase transitions in graphite.
the graphite melting line at low pressures is now well established (ludwig 1902; basset 1939; jones 1958; gathers et al.
1974a, b; kirillin et al.
1984; savvatimskiy 2005; scheindlin and senchenko 1988; fig.
2).
since the original measurements of its compressibility (adams 1921) and vibrational spectrum (ramaswamy 1930; raman 1961), the physical properties of carbon allotropes have been well determined over the range of conditions relevant to earth’s interior.
for example, there is excellent agreement on the value of diamond’s very high bulk modulus (440 gpa at 300 k) from a variety of experimental and theoretical techniques (occelli et al.
2003).
the singular strength of diamond correlates with its very high shear modulus (535 gpa at 300 k, which exceeds the bulk modulus (observed in only a few materials: brazhkin et al.
2002).
theoretical methods now accurately reproduce the elastic properties of diamond and provide robust predictions of their variations over the entire p-t range of earth’s interior (nuñez valdez et al.
2012).
the electronic properties of diamond are now well determined experimentally (endo et al 2001), and there is excellent agreement with electronic structure calculations.
on the other hand, the anharmonic properties of diamond are not fully understood (gillet et al.
1998).
the initial slope of the diamond melting line was for many years controversial, but now seems well established and has a positive value (bundy et al.
1996), recent very high p-t shock wave indicate a maximum in the melting line near 1.5 tpa (knudson et al.
2008; eggert et al.
2010; fig.
3).
early first-principles calculations (galli et al.
1989) indicated that liquid carbon at low pressure and 5000 k,  should  have  mainly  two-fold  and  three-fold coordination.
theoretical studies of the carbon melting curve have continued to super-earth conditions beyond the stability of diamond (see correa et al 2006).
the types and concentrations of defects present in the material remain subjects of study (gabrysch 2008).
recent advances in analytical methods confirm that most mantle diamonds are very pure except for variable low concentrations of nitrogen.
mcneill et al.
(2009) analyzed a suite of 10 diamonds from the cullinan mine (previously known as premier), south africa, along with other diamonds from siberia (mir and udachnaya) and venezuela.
the concentrations of a wide range of elements for all the samples (expressed by weight in the solid) are very low, with rare earth elements along with y, nb, and cs ranging from 0.01 to 2 ppb.
large ion lithophile elements (lile) such as rb and ba vary from 1 to 30 ppb.
ti ranges from ppb levels up to 2 ppm.
the graphite-to-diamond and graphite-to-lonsdaleite transitions have been intensely investigated (see hazen 1999; hazen et al.
2013).
the position of the diamond/graphite equilibrium line has been quite accurately established by thermodynamic calculations based upon the measured physical properties of graphite and diamond in the temperature range from 300 to about 1200 k (rossini and jessup 1938; leipunskii 1939; berman and simon 1955; day 2012) and by experiments on growing or graphitization of diamond (bundy et al.
1961; kennedy and kennedy 1976).
shock compression experiments on hexagonal graphite particles yield mostly hexagonal diamond (e.g., kudryumov et al.
2012), whereas in natural  impact events, kinetics and grain size can influence the survival of lonsdaleite (decarli et al.
2002a).
metastable phases
because of the high cohesive and activation energy, carbon polymorphs typically exist metastably well into a p-t region where a different solid phase is thermodynamically stable.
for example, diamond survives indefinitely at room conditions, where graphite is the thermodynamically stable form.
the metastability of diamond may also persist to very high pressures, well into the stability field of higher-pressure phases.
we also mention that studies of metastable growth of diamond within earth continue, though the mechanism is not well understood (simakov 2012).
it is also useful to point out that diamond can be easily produced outside of its stability field (e.g., by chemical vapor deposition), and that it can exhibit striking properties (hazen 1999).
for example, measurements show that the material has much higher toughness than natural diamond (liang et al.
2009; pan et al.
2009).
similarly, the natural hexagonal diamond or lonsdaleite (bundy and kasper 1967; lonsdale 1971) is becoming increasingly recognized in both meteoritic and terrestrial materials (ross et al.
2011; shumilova et al.
2011), yet its occurrence cannot be interpreted in terms of origin, since fundamental understanding of its metastability remains unresolved (godard et al.
2012; kurdyumov et al.
2012).
metastable allotropes of carbon include fullerenes, nanotubes, and graphene, as well as disordered or amorphous forms, such  as  glassy  carbon   and  carbon black and possibly metastable solid forms referred to as carbynes (see hazen et al.
2013, table 1).
the synthesis of carbynes (sp hybridized allotrope) has been reported (kasatochkin et al.
1967; chalifoux and tykwinski 2010), but this finding remains controversial.
the proclivity of carbon to form well-defined kinetically stable structures persists at extreme conditions.
for example, it has long been known that if graphite is compressed to ~15 gpa at low temperature (e.g., room temperature or below) it transforms to a different allotrope of carbon that is distinct from diamond (aust and drickamer 1963; hanfland  et al.
1989; zhao and spain 1989; miller et al.
1997; utsumi and yagi 1991; yagi et al.
1992; mao et al.
2003).
the phase was found to exhibit unusual properties.
for example, goncharov (1990) found that the transition pressure for single-crystal graphite can be lowered to about 14 gpa under uniaxial stress directed along the c-axis of the crystal.
these raman and optical observations were corroborated by hanfland et al.
(1989) and utsumi et al.
(1993).
hanfland et al.
(1990) showed that the phase transition started at about 14 gpa using x-ray diffraction and raman spectroscopy.
the phase formed from single-crystal graphite was found to be transparent, and miller et al.
(1997) quenched the transparent form at low temperatures.
x-ray raman and diffraction measurements reported by mao et al.
(2003) showed mixed sp2 and sp3 bonding but the structure could not be determined.
the phase was also found to be superhard (fig.
4).
very recently, wang et al.
(2012b) used x-ray diffraction, raman spectroscopy, and optical techniques to examine this phase.
early calculations of the structure formed from compression of graphite were carried out by kertesz and hoffmann (1984) and fahy et al.
(1986).
this metastable transition has been the subject of more recent theoretical studies.
using uspex, oganov and glass (2006) found a number of interesting low-energy metastable carbon allotropes, among which was a monoclinic (space group c2/m) structure with tetrahedral coordination (sp3 hybridization) of carbon atoms, forming 5- and 7-fold rings (fig.
5).
the structure has a 2d-analog: (2x1)-reconstructions of the (111) surfaces of diamond and silicon.
li et al.
(2009) subsequently named this structure m-carbon (because of its monoclinic symmetry) and identified it as the “superhard graphite,” based on the close match between theoretical and experimental diffraction data.
the bct-c4 structure (baughman et al.
1997; umemoto et al.
2010; zhou et al.
2010) was proposed as an alternative, and that was shortly followed by descriptions of hypothetical w-carbon (wang et al.
2011) and z-carbon (zhao et al.
2011; amsler et al.
2012), as well as further structures (e.g., selli et al.
2011; niu et al.
2012).
it is notable also that while amsler et al.
(2012) proposed z-carbon to explain experimental measurements on “superhard graphite,” zhao et al.
(2011) concluded that its x-ray diffraction is incompatible with experimental data on “superhard graphite,” but can explain experimental data on over-compressed carbon nanotubes (wang et al.
2004).
with two evolutionary metadynamics simulations starting from graphite-2h and graphite-3r, zhu et al.
(2012b) found all of these structures and several new ones.
all of these structures are metastable, superhard, and insulating; they all become more stable than graphite under pressure (7 to 27 gpa); they all contain carbon entirely in the tetrahedral coordination; and they all have buckled graphene sheets, suggesting possible mechanism of formation of these phases from graphite.
although more than a dozen different crystal structures have been suggested for the phase, the proposed low-symmetry, monclinic, m-carbon structure proposed by li et al.
(2009) is the only one that fits the highest resolution high-pressure data, reported by wang et al.
(2012b).
theory can discriminate between proposed high-pressure metastable structures and provide insights into the transition.
the metastable high-pressure phase is formed solely because it has the lowest activation barrier at the indicated p-t conditions (e.g., 15 gpa and 300 k).
using transition path sampling (dellago et al.
1998; leoni and boulfelfel 2010; boulfelfel et al.
2012) found that the likeliest sp3 structure of carbon to be formed by room-temperature compression of graphite-2h is indeed m-carbon.
boulfelfel et al.
(2012) predict this transition has a lower energy barrier than transitions to other structures.
the transition involves bending of graphene layers and formation of bonds between them—a mechanism that leads to the peculiar geometry of m-carbon with 5-and 7-fold rings.
fullerenes at pressure
we now consider transitions and structures formed from metastable low-pressure fullerene-related phases.
the ambient phase of c60 has the high-symmetry face-centered cubic (fcc) structure.
reversible transitions are observed at low p-t conditions (see hemley and dera 2000).
under hydrostatic conditions the fcc structure of solid c60 remains kinetically stable to pressures of 20 gpa, whereas non-hydrostatic stress induces a phase transition to a new phase of lower symmetry (duclos et al.
1991).
further studies revealed that non-hydrostatic compression of c60 induces the formation of diamond (núñez-regueiro et al.
1992) and other related structures above 15 gpa (sundqvist 1999).
compression increases the possibility of interaction between the double bonds on nearest neighbor molecules, which results in the formation of polymers (marques et al.
1996; sundqvist 1999).
he and ne can be introduced into fullerene cages (see saunders et al.
1996).
the extent to which this could lead to the possibility of trapping gases under pressure in planetary interiors remains to be investigated.
recently, wang et al.
(2012a) reported a long-range ordered material constructed from units of amorphous carbon clusters synthesized by compressing solvated fullerenes.
using x-ray diffraction, raman spectroscopy, and quantum molecular dynamics simulation, they observed that, although c60 cages were crushed and became amorphous, the solvent molecules remained intact, playing a crucial role in maintaining the long-range periodicity.
once formed, the high-pressure phase is quenchable back to ambient conditions.
the phase has very high strength, producing ring cracks in the diamond anvils used in the experiment (as does the phase produced from graphite; mao et al.
2003).
ultrahigh-pressure phases
a number of studies through the years have addressed the question of the upper limits of the diamond stability field and possible post-diamond phases.
experimental data in this p-t regime have been obtained by dynamic compression.
early lda calculations by fahy and louie (1987) predicted that at pressures above 1 tpa diamond transforms to the so-called bc8 structure—an unusual tetrahedral structure that has been observed as a metastable state of silicon (kasper and richards 1964).
their total energy calculations (fahy and louie 1987) showed that diamond becomes less stable than the bc8 structure, but more stable structures might exist.
evolutionary crystal structure prediction simulations (oganov and glass 2006) confirm their conclusion that above 1 tpa the bc8 structure of carbon is thermodynamically stable.
other theoretical calculations, together with existing shock-wave data, are consistent with these predictions for bc8 (knudson et al.
2008).
martinez-canales et al.
(2012) employed dft methods to examine structures with up to 12 carbon atoms per unit cell at pressures between 1 tpa and 1 petapascal (1000 tpa).
they propose a sequence of denser carbon allotropes: the bc8 phase is predicted to transform to the simple cubic structure at 2.9 tpa, followed by a soft-phonon transition to a simple hexagonal structure at 6.4 tpa, the electride fcc structure at 21 tpa, a double hexagonal close-packed (hcp) structure at 270 tpa, and ultimately a body-centered cubic (bcc) structure at 650 tpa.
it is now possible to explore these ultrahigh-pressure regimes with dynamic compression techniques using megajoule class lasers such as the national ignition facility (nif; e.g.
r. smith et al., to be published).
carbides
carbides of iron have been considered as potentially significant components of earth’s core based on early comparisons with meteoritic iron (ringwood 1960; lovering 1964; ahrens 1982; hazen et al.
2013) and the requirement for a light alloying element to match observed core densities (birch 1964; wood et al.
2013).
the stoichiometry of high-pressure fe-carbide is uncertain; if fe7c3 is more stable than fe3c, then up to 1.5 percent carbon could be present in the inner core (mookherjee 2011; mookherjee et al.
2011).
the incorporation of carbon in the fluid outer core has been studied based on extrapolations from low p-t data as well as various theoretical techniques (terasaki et al.
2010; zhang and yin 2012; and references therein).
the widespread existence of carbides in earth’s silicate mantle (particularly fe-carbide) has been predicted for depths >250 km based on experimentally determined fo2 conditions (frost et al.
2004; rohrbach et al.
2007, 2010; frost and mccammon 2008; rohrbach and schmidt 2011; stagno and frost 2011) and the reactivity of carbon and iron at high pressures and temperatures (rouquette et al.
2008; oganov et al 2008; lord et al.
2009).
mantle iron carbide stability is illustrated schematically in figure 6 as a function of depth and oxygen fugacity.
despite the prediction for abundant fe-carbides in the mantle, terrestrial occurrences are very rare, and are typically associated with diamond.
fe-carbides have been documented as inclusions within diamonds from jagersfontein, south africa (jones at al.
2008); juina, brazil (kaminsky and wirth 2011); and the 23rd party congress kimberlite, russia (bulanova and zayakina 1991).
scarce occurrences of “native iron” inclusions in diamond (stachel et al.
1998; bulanova et al.
2010) likely include unrecognized fe-carbide.
other fragmentary evidence to support carbide in the mantle includes unique spherical micro-inclusions of fe-carbide (“cohenite”) observed in garnet intergrowths from polycrystalline mantle diamond (jacob et al.
2004).
the mantle fe-rich carbide compositions from jagersfontein are the most numerous and show limited compositional variation of (fe-ni-cr) with minor constituent silicon and trace co (table 1; fig.
7; hazen et al.
2013).
chemically these mantle carbides appear to be mixtures of various end members like haxonite [(fe,ni)23c6] and isovite [(cr,fe)23c6], but there is no experimental information on their phase relations at high-pressure mantle conditions.
the equation of state and elastic constants of cohenite have been studied to at least 187 gpa (scott et al.
2001; fiquet et al.
2009; sata et al.
2010).
theoretical studies employing the random sampling approach by weerasinghe et al.
(2011) suggest that at inner core pressures (330 to 364 gpa) cohenite transforms to a denser orthorhombic cmcm structure.
evolutionary structure prediction simulations (bazhanova et al.
2012) found an even more stable structure with space group i-4, [set this properly as i{overbar4}] which at 0 k is stable in the pressure range 310 to 410 gpa.
both the random sampling study (weerasinghe et al.
2011) and the evolutionary prediction (bazhanova et al.
2012) agree that at inner core pressures fe3c is not thermodynamically stable.
rather, fe2c with the pnma space group appears to be the most stable iron carbide at pressures of earth’s inner core.
bazhanova et al.
(2012) found that incorporation of ~13 mol% carbon into the inner core leads to perfect matching of its density, which sets the upper limit for the carbon content of the core.
more complex chemistries (e.g., ternary phase) remains to be studied using these techniques.
in addition, it would be useful to examine higher p-t conditions relevant to super earths.
we note that mixed metal carbides exhibit interesting electronic properties such as superconductivity [e.g.
mgcxni3 (x≈1), which has a perovskite structure (he et al.
2001).
molecular framework structures
carbon dioxide
a number of molecular solids may play a role in carbon mineralogy, both at low temperatures and at high pressures (hemley and dera 2000).
the crystalline phases of carbon dioxide exemplify the potential for varied crystal chemical contexts.
the familiar low-temperature phase of carbon dioxide, also known as “dry ice,” incorporates isolated linear co2 molecules in a cubic structure (space group pa3, a ~ 5.5 å), with 4 linear co2 molecules per unit cell (keesom and köhler 1934; aoki et al.
1994).
structure refinement of this phase at 1.0 gpa gives a c-o bond length of 1.168(1) å (downs and somayazulu 1998), very close to that of the free molecule.
this phase, which is a mineral in the cold polar regions of mars (byrne and ingersoll 2003), can also form at room temperature and pressures above ~0.3 gpa.
phase iii crystallizes in a cmca structure.
the reported phase ii (0.5-2.3 gpa) is less well characterized (liu 1983), and downs and somayazulu (1998) find that phase i is stable in at least part of this pressure range.
it has also been reported that a distorted phase iv forms between the stability field of i and iii (olijnyk and jephcoat 1998).
co2 iii was identified by raman spectroscopy (hanson 1985; olijnyk et al.
1988).
at pressures >10 gpa carbon dioxide transforms to one of at least three other molecular solids, denoted phases ii, iii, and iv, as well as a possible phase vii, depending on the temperature (aoki et al.
1994; park et al.
2003; sun et al.
2009; datchi et al.
2009).
however, these relatively low-density forms of crystalline co2 are not expected to persist at mantle conditions.
the existence of co2-based framework structures analogous to sio2 with the coordination of carbon by oxygen increased from three- to four-fold was first shown by raman studies, which provided direct evidence for a polymeric structure following laser heating at pressures above ~40 gpa and above 2000 k (iota et al.
1999).
the phase was originally called “quartz-like” based on the close similarity to the vibrational spectra of quartz and named co2-v (iota et al.
1999).
first-principles theory has confirmed the stability of framework structures with tetrahedral carbon; i.e., relative both to the molecular solid and to decomposition to elemental carbon and hydrogen (serra et al.
1999).
subsequent x-ray diffraction data appeared to be best fit with the tridymite structure (yoo et al 1999).
the stability of the phase has been examined with experiments (tschauner et al.
2001; santoro et al.
2006) and theoretical calculations (holm et al.
2000; dong, et al.
2000; bonev et al.
2003; oganov et al.
2008).
an additional possible phase vi with octahedrally-coordinated carbon reported by iota et al.
(2008) has not been confirmed by other experiments or theory.
the structures of these phases were until recently under debate.
at the same time, it was not possible to rule out that there may be even more stable structures.
evolutionary crystal structure prediction calculations (oganov et al.
2008) were shown to be consistent with β-cristobalite as the thermodynamically stable crystal structure (fig.
8).
the structure of phase v has been recently determined by high-pressure x-ray diffraction measurements (fig.
9; datchi et al.
2012; santoro et al.
2012).
using high-pressure diamond anvil cells combined with high-temperature laser heating, the authors of both studies formed co2-v and probed the crystal structure using synchrotron x-ray diffraction measurements.
through rietveld analysis methods, both groups determined that co2-v does in fact have the β-cristobalite structure and is composed of co4 tetrahedral units.
interestingly, the co4 units possess o-c-o bond angles that average 109.5°, in stark contrast to molecular carbon dioxide.
structural determination as a function of pressure revealed the bulk modulus of 136 gpa, significantly less than the value reported previously (yoo et al.
1999).
the melting curve of co2 has been determined to 15 gpa (giordano et al., 2006; giordano and datchi, 2007).
quenched samples after laser heating to 2000–3000 k at 28–75 gpa showed that co2 breaks down to form oxygen and diamond at lower temperature with increasing pressure (tschauner et al.
2001).
recently, the solid–solid phase transitions, melting behavior, and chemical reactivity of co2 to these pressures and at temperatures up to 2500 k using in situ raman spectroscopy in laser-heated diamond anvil cells were reported by litasov et al.
(2011).
molecular co2 melts to a molecular fluid up to 33 (±2) gpa and 1720 (±100) k, where it meets a solid–solid phase line to form a triple point (fig.
10).
at higher pressure, non-molecular phase v does not melt but instead dissociates to carbon and oxygen with a transition line having a negative p-t slope.
a comparison with p–t profiles of earth’s mantle indicates that co2-v can be stable near the top of the lower mantle and dissociates at greater depths.
decarbonation reactions of subducted carbonates in the lower mantle would produce diamond and fluid oxygen, which in turn significantly affects redox state, increasing oxygen fugacity by several orders of magnitude.
the reaction of free oxygen with lower mantle minerals such as mg-perovskite could create significant conductivity anomalies (litasov et al.
2011).
decomposition of co2 was found to be unlikely in first-principles calculations (oganov et al.
2008; boates et al 2012), as the computed enthalpy of decomposition of co2 is extremely high (3.3 ev at 50 gpa), discrepancy between experiment and theory that needs to be resolved.
recently, evidence for coesite-structured co2 has been reported (sengupta and yoo 2009).
still higher-pressure structures of co2 are predicted (fig.
11), including dissociation at tpa pressures due to the predicted higher density of the elemental assemblage is predicted (fig.
12).
other compounds
early work on the high-pressure behavior of other binary carbon compounds, in particular formed from simple molecular phases, was reviewed by hemley and dera (2000).
recently, structures of carbon monoxide have been investigated theoretically using dft (sun et al.
2011).
both three-dimensional frameworks and layered structures were reported stable above 2 gpa, although these may have been metastable.
some of these new structures of co (fig.
13) could be metallic and others might be recoverable to ambient pressure.
the high-pressure behavior of clathrate hydrates, which exist in nature in several forms depending on pressure and temperature and gas composition, are of special interest.
recent high-pressure neutron scattering studies have provided definitive experimental results for testing and refining intermolecular potentials used to describe the hydrophobic interactions in these dense molecular phases (tulk et al.
2012).
these measurements yielded detailed data on the structure of a high-pressure form of methane clathrate hydrate and gave precise information on the number of methane molecules that could fit into the cages of the inclusion compound.
the results showed that the correct occupancy for the largest cages in this beautiful structure is three methane molecules.
the study provides tests of models for hydrophobic interactions and methane-methane interactions since the high-pressure structure h clathrate contains cages that are both singly and triply occupied.
similar types of high-pressure transformations to denser forms can be anticipated for hydrocarbon phases.
for example, liquid methane has been observed on titan’s surface and crystalline forms may occur at depth (e.g., shin et al.
2012).
at room temperature and 1.59 gpa methane crystallizes to the low-temperature (methane i) form, in which rotationally disordered ch4 molecules occupy positions of a face-centered cubic (space group fm3m) lattice (hazen et al.
1980).
the higher-pressure behavior of crystalline methane is complex, with several known phases.
above 5.25 gpa and room temperature solid methane transforms to structures in which the molecules are rotationally locked (hirai et al.
2008).
these studies point to the vast unexplored phase stability of high-pressure molecular hydrocarbons (see, sephton and hazen 2013)
carbonates
behavior of sp2 carbonates
high-pressure phase transitions in rhombohedral carbonates epitomize the challenges of understanding deep carbon mineralogy, because a variety of reversible metastable transitions to slightly denser sp2 forms are possible, and these forms are less kinetically inhibited than reconstructive transitions to sp3 forms.
calcite provided one of the earliest experimental demonstrations of distinctive metastable high-pressure carbonate phases (bridgman 1939; jamieson 1957; merrill and bassett 1975).
at ~1.5 gpa and 25°c calcite transforms displacively to a monoclinic form known as calcite-ii with space group p21/c, with a second reversible transition at ~2.2 gpa to calcite-iii (suito et al.
2001).
catalli and williams (2005) report yet another transition to a presumably distorted modification of calcite-iii at p ~25 gpa, which reverts to calcite-iii with significant hysteresis on lowering pressure.
less attention has been paid to the high-pressure polymorphs of other rhombohedral carbonates (hazen et al.
2013).
the high-pressure behavior of ferrous iron and magnesium carbonates, which are likely candidates for deep-earth carbonates, are of special interest (biellmann et al.
1993; isshiki et al.
2004; panero and kabbes 2008; seto et al.
2008).
the high-spin (hs) to low-spin (ls) magnetic transition in siderite measured by means of x-ray emission spectroscopy (xes) has been reported to occur at 50 gpa (mattila et al.
2007).
the structure does not change through the spin transition, but there is a discontinuous volume change (lavina et al.
2010).
however, at 10 gpa and 1800 k, siderite breaks down to form a new iron oxide fe4o5, isostructural with calcium ferrite, though the residual carbon phase was not identified (lavina et al.
2011).
dolomite [camg(co3)2] is considered to be a major constituent of subducted carbonates (e.g., zhu and ogasawara 2002); therefore its phase stability and equation of state at high pressures and temperatures is important to understanding earth’s deep carbon cycle.
at pressures below 7 gpa and temperatures between ~500 and 1000 ºc dolomite is observed to decompose to aragonite plus magnesite (martinez et al.
1996; sato and katsura 2001).
as a result, dolomite is normally not considered a potential carrier to transport carbon to earth’s deep interior.
however, two higher-pressure phases of dolomite have been documented experimentally.
dolomite-ii, which has the calcite-iii structure, occurs at pressure >20 gpa (santillán et al.
2003).
mao et al.
(2011) observed a transition to a significantly denser monoclinic phase called dolomite-iii at 41 gpa and 1200 ºc, with stability extending to 83 gpa.
this study by mao et al.
(2011) provides evidence that the addition of minor amounts of iron can stabilize dolomite in polymorphs that exist at p-t conditions of subducting slabs, thereby providing a mechanism to carry carbonate into the deep mantle.
x-ray diffraction/laser heating techniques were used to study high-pressure and temperature dolomite polymorphs to 83 gpa and 1700 k of a natural fe-bearing dolomite from windham, vermont with a composition of ca0.988mg0.918fe0.078mn0.016(co3)2.
they observed two distinct phase transformations: 1) to dolomite-ii at ~17 gpa and 300 k, and 2) to a new monoclinic phase (dolomite-iii) between 36 and 83 gpa.
both high-pressure polymorphs were stable up to 1500 k, indicating that the addition of minor fe stabilizes dolomite under the conditions akin to the deep mantle.
thus, fe-dolomite may provide a means for delivering carbon to earth’s deep interior, though additional experiments are required to determine the structure of dolomite-iii, examine the potential effects of fe substitution on the phase transitions, and determine the redox properties of fe-bearing carbonate in earth’s mantle.
za reccen experimental study examined the high-pressure vibrational and elastic properties of iron-bearing magnesite across the spin transition.
distinctive changes in the unit cell volumes and vibrational properties are indicative of a high-spin to low-spin transition at 40 gpa.
the spin transition enhances the stability of the carbonate phase (lin et al 2012).
the orthorhombic aragonite group minerals (hazen et al.
2013) have received less study at high pressure.
holl et al.
(2000) studied witherite to 8 gpa and found that it undergoes a displacive phase transition at approximately 7 gpa.
the topology of the structure did not change, but the co3 groups shifted into the same plane as the ba atoms, changing the symmetry to hexagonal.
high-pressure sp3 carbonates
given the behavior of other carbon-bearing systems at very high pressure, it seems likely that the sp2 carbonates with trigonally coordinated carbon will transform to sp3 polymorphs with tetrahedrally-coordinated carbon.
at ~40 gpa, ono et al.
(2005) found a phase transition from aragonite to another phase, which was subsequently solved using the uspex method and verified experimentally (fig.
14; oganov et al.
2006; ono et al.
2007).
the structure (orthorhombic, space group pmmn) was called post-aragonite; it still has carbon in the sp2-state (co3-anions), and is characterized by 12-fold coordination of ca atoms and joint hexagonal close packing of oxygen and calcium atoms.
at pressures above 137 gpa, a new structure was predicted using uspex (oganov et al.
2006), and once again the predicted structure matched the experimental x-ray diffraction patterns obtained at p > 130 gpa (ono et al.
2007) well.
the structure (space group c2221) features chains of carbonate tetrahedra similar to silicate tetrahedral chains in pyroxenes.
however, unlike pyroxenes, the c2221 structure has large cations in one position (rather than two in pyroxenes).
the presence of tetrahedral carbonate ions (with sp3 hybridization) marks a dramatic shift in the chemistry of carbonates.
note that both post-aragonite and the c2221 structures belong to new structure-types, which could not have been found by analogy with any known structures.
another new structure with p1 symmetry was found by (oganov et al.
2006) as metastable and energetically closely competitive with aragonite in a wide pressure range.
it is predicted to be stable in a narrow (a few gpa) pressure interval around 42 gpa, between aragonite and post-aragonite.
a phase with this structure was recently documented in experiments of merlini et al.
(2012).
experiments demonstrate that magnesite is stable at least up to ~80 gpa (fiquet et al.
2002) and transforms to a new phase above 100 gpa (isshiki et al.
2004).
systematic search through databases of known crystal structures, combined with energy minimization, indicated that a pyroxene structure (space group c2/c) becomes energetically more favorable than magnesite above ~100 gpa (skorodumova et al.
2005), but oganov et al.
(2006) found that the c2221 structure (stable for caco3) is preferable to the c2/c pyroxene structure.
uspex simulations at 110 gpa and 150 gpa found a large number of low-enthalpy structures that are competitive in a wide pressure range and are more favorable than previously known structures (oganov et al.
2008).
magnesite was found to be stable up to 82 gpa, whereas at higher pressures there are two phases with similar structures containing three-membered rings {c3o9}6− made of carbonate tetrahedra (fig.
15) and mg atoms in eight- and ten-fold coordinations.
these unusual structures were confirmed experimentally in a recent x-ray diffraction study by boulard et al.
(2011), who found that the mg-fe carbon-bearing compound can form at conditions corresponding to depths greater than 1,800 km (fig.
16).
its structure, based on three-membered rings of corner-sharing (co4)4- tetrahedra, closely agrees with the earlier predictions (oganov et al.
2008).
this polymorph of carbonates concentrates fe(iii) as a result of intracrystalline reaction between fe(ii) and co32- groups schematically written as 4feo + co2 → 2fe2o3 + c. this oxidation-reduction reaction results in an assemblage consisting of the new high-pressure phase, magnetite, and diamond.
above ~160 gpa, (oganov et al 2008) simulations predict a structure with space group pna21 containing chains of corner-sharing carbonate tetrahedra to be stable.
the presence of tetrahedral carbonate-ions at very high pressures invites an analogy with silicates, but the analogy is limited.
in silicates, the inter-tetrahedral angle si-o-si is extremely flexible (belov 1961), which is one of the reasons for the enormous diversity of silicate structure types.
figure 17 shows the variation of the energy as a function of the si-o-si angle in the model h6si2o7 molecule (lasaga and gibbs 1987).
one can see only a shallow minimum at si–o–si ≈ 135º, but a deep minimum at c–o–c ≈ 124º with steep energy variations for h6c2o6.
this difference suggests a much more limited structural variety of tetrahedral carbonates, compared to silicates.
the c–o–c angles in the tetrahedral structures of co2, caco3, and mgco3 are in the relatively narrow range from 115° to 125° at atmospheric pressure and decrease to 112° to 115° at 100 gpa.
the differences between silicates and tetrahedral carbonates can also be seen from the large differences in the high-pressure structures of co2, caco3, and mgco3 and the stable structures of sio2, casio3, and mgsio3.
the fundamental change of carbonate chemistry from sp2 (triangular carbonate ions) to sp3 (tetrahedral carbonate ions) has important consequences for the viscosity of carbonate melts, which at high pressures (presumably above ~80 to 130 gpa) is expected to be rather high (in contrast to very low viscosity of liquid carbonates at low pressures; jones et al.
2013).
this prediction remains to be confirmed experimentally.
silicate carbonates
under ambient conditions, co2 and sio2 are thermodynamically stable and do not react.
therefore, a natural question is whether or not compounds between co2 and sio2 are even possible under any conditions, and how they might relate to recently identified silicon clathrate in carbonatite (melanophlogite: beard et al.
2013).
a recent study has reported the discovery that a silicon carbonate phase can form from carbon dioxide and silica under pressure (santoro et al.
2011).
in this work, dense carbon dioxide fills the micro-pores of silicalite, a pure sio2 zeolitic material, at high pressure.
all the sio4 tetrahedra are on the surface of the micropores and consequently in contact with the co2.
the large effective interaction area between the two materials greatly favors the chemical reaction between them.
this silicon carbonate phase is obtained when the system is compressed to 18-20 gpa and heated at 600-700 k. the material can be temperature quenched and was characterized by optical spectroscopy and synchrotron x-ray diffraction (fig.
18).
the structure of this new compound reflects that of the original silicalite crystal, although it is affected by stoichiometric and spatial disorder.
high-pressure silicate-carbonates with 4-coordinated carbon and 6-coordinated silicon represent an as yet unexplored crystal chemical possibility.
more than 50 low-pressure silicate-carbonates with 3-coordinated carbon and 4-coordinated silicon are known, most notably the ca-si-carbonates spurrite [ca5(sio4)2(co3)] and tilleyite [ca5(si2o7)(co3)2].
some of these unusual crystal structures, which incorporate both planar co3 and tetrahedral sio4 units, may represent plausible structure topologies for high-pressure calcium carbonates with carbon in mixed 3- and 4-coordination.
alternatively, polyhedral packing arrangements for tetravalent cations in both tetrahedral and octahedral coordination are well established.
for example, (geo6) octahedra and (sio4) tetrahedra combine in the synthetic phases ca2ge2si5o16 and bagesi3o6 (robbins et al.
1968; smolin 1969; nevskii et al.
1975), while the rare mineral bartelkeite [pbfegevi(geiv2o7)(oh)2.h2o] incorporates both geo4 and geo6 polyhedra (origlieri et al.
2012).
these structure types, therefore, are possible isomorphs for silicate-carbonates at mantle pressures.
in addition, hazen et al.
(1996) describe a related group of unusual high-pressure framework silicates with mixed 4- and 6-coordinated silicon (fig.
19) with the general formula:
[(a1+4-2xb2+x)sivim(siivno2(m+n)+2],
where a and b are monovalent and divalent cations, respectively, in 8 or greater coordination.
all of these layered structures, including the benitoite form of basi4o9 and the wadeite form of k2si4o9 (swanson and prewitt 1983; finger et al.
1995), possess densities intermediate between those of purely 4- or 6-coordinated phases, and thus must represent a transitional pressure range.
therefore, with the caveat that o-c-o angles are more restricted than o-si-o angles (see above), a variety of plausible deep-earth silicate-carbonate structures, including alkali and alkaline earth silicate-carbonate phases, should not be overlooked.
at pressures significantly greater than those of earth’s lower mantle it is likely that silicon adopts a coordination greater than six; possible mixed carbon-silicate phases in this regime remains to be explored.
these phases could be important components of carbon-rich super-earths.
finally, the nature of carbonates and silicate-carbonates at more extreme conditions, including those reached on dynamic compression, represents an unexplored area for future research.
transient shock pressures generated in bolide impacts exceed the duration of laboratory shock synthesis by orders of magnitude and, despite potential kinetic effects (decarli et al.
2002b), offer distinct potential for understanding the high-pressure behavior of carbon mineralogy.
combinations of natural observations, experiments, and modeling provide an important framework for understanding high-pressure phase equilibria in mixed carbon-silicate and simple carbonate systems over a very wide temperature interval (martinez et al.
1998; jones et al.
2000).
conclusions
this survey of carbon mineralogy outlines much that is known regarding varied possible c-bearing mineral phases in deep planetary interiors.
with the exception of the diamond polymorph of carbon and rare occurrences of si and fe carbides (hazen et al.
2013), deep carbon phases have not been well documented, and with few notable exceptions, their high-pressure stability limits are still poorly understood.
furthermore, although the measured solubility of carbon in nominally acarbonaceous upper mantle silicates is extremely low (keppler et al.
2003), the potential for carbon solid solution in lower mantle and core phases, including oxides, silicates, sulfides, and silicate melts, is not well constrained (ni and keppler 2013).
thus, while documented inventories of earth’s carbon represent only ~0.07 weight percent, hidden reservoirs may represent in excess of 1.5 percent (mason 1979; kerridge 1985; javoy 1997).
this situation is analogous to our understanding of the deep hydrogen cycle 30 years ago (smyth 2006; smyth and jacobsen 2006).
future high-pressure studies might consider the significant potential for storage and distribution of trace elements in c phases, including n, light elements, and especially noble gases, whose association with deep carbon is implied from volcanic degassing and from cosmochemistry (see marty et al.
2013).
we should also examine whether stability of new high-pressure c-bearing phases may influence isotopic fractionation at high-pressure conditions (mikhail et al.
2011), which has enormous implications for reservoirs, fluxes, and geodynamic processes from the core to the atmosphere.
a great deal has been learned recently from both high-pressure experiments and computational theory.
recent advances point to the likelihood of novel sp3 phases with tetrahedrally-coordinated carbon, including topologies that differ from those of silicate minerals.
high-pressure carbonates and carbonate-silicates will continue to be of special interest in modeling the extent and distribution of mantle carbon and elucidating the deep carbon cycle.
high-pressure studies of carbon-bearing molecular phases also hold great promise for discovering novel phases with unusual properties.
we thus anticipate that the next decade will see rapid and fundamental advances in the understanding of the mineralogy of carbon at extreme conditions.
figure captions
figure 1.
structures of selected allotropes of carbon.
figure 2.
phase diagram for carbon in earth to 50 gpa (approximately 1500 km depth), showing the classic diamond-graphite line and field for liquid; note the liquidus for diamond has positive dp/dt consistent with calculations to higher pressure, and the only significant change to the early curve of bundy et al.
(1996).
the red curve marks the metastable lonsdaleite or hexagonal (h-) diamond transition from utsumi et al.
(1996).
at p-t conditions close to this red curve and above ~1070 k (800 oc), h-diamond from graphite is quenchable and recoverable, whereas below ~1070 k, h-diamond is unquenchable.
the form of graphite used in the experiments has some influence, and additional metasatable complications for h-diamond are not yet fully understood (see utsumi and yagi 1991; utsumi et al.
1994).
lonsdaleite is associated with formation in terrestrial impact craters and meteorites (see review in ross et al.
2011) and its recent enigmatic discovery in ultrahigh pressure (uhp) metamorphic rocks may either be due to impact shock, or crystal-scale overpressure (godard et al.
2012).
figure 3.
calculated phase relations for diamond to super earth conditions.
above 1000 gpa diamond is displaced by bc8.
the green line marks the terrestrial geotherm (approximate), along which the maximum pressure at earth’s center corresponds to ~360 gpa in the inner core.
note that diamond is stable to approximately twice the pressure at earth’s center and does not melt below ~5000k.
diamond is expected to be a planetary “survivor of catastrophe,” such as the moon-forming collision on earth.
diagram based on correa et al (2006).
note that on this diagram with extreme pressure range, the field for graphite is too small to depict (but tracks along the low-pressure axis).
figure 4.
x-ray raman spectra of graphite under pressure.
the lower energy peak, labeled π, corresponds to 1s to π* transitions and the higher energy portion, labeled σ, corresponds to 1s to σ* transitions.
the bottom spectra, taken in the horizontal direction, probes bonds in the a  plane, and the top spectra, taken in the vertical direction, probe the c plane.
the inset shows the geometry of the diamond anvil cell experiment.
the spectra reveal the development of mixed π and σ bonding in the high pressure phase formed by compression of graphite (adapted from mao et al.
2003).
figure 5.
calculated high-pressure metastable sp3 structures of elemental carbon.
reproduced from zhu et al.
(2012b).
figure 6.
the polymorphs of carbon as a function of fo2 with depth in an ambient pyrolitic mantle (mikhail et al.
2011; modified from rohrbach and schmidt 2011).
note the dominance in the terrestrial mantle for reduced carbon species relative to carbonate.
figure 7.
plot of fe-ni-cr compositions of mantle carbide inclusions within diamond at jagersfontein, based on electron microprobe analyses (after jones et al.
2008).
different diamonds can host different carbide compositions: solid red circles = jag1 (n = 9), open blue circles = jag2 (n = 5) and solid black square (jag10 n = 17).
these carbides also contain minor co, si and o (see table 1).
figure 8.
co2 structures: a) molecular p42/mnm structure, stable at lower pressures than polymeric co2-v phase; b) β-cristobalite-type structure of co2-v with tetrahedral coordination of carbon atoms; c) polymeric c2221 structure, d) metastable polymeric pna21 structure.
from (oganov et al.
2008).
at the bottom are the calculated enthalpies of candidate structures of co2: e) in the low-pressure region, relative to the molecular pa3 structure; f) in the high-pressure region, relative to the non-molecular c222 structure.
from (oganov et al.
2008).
figure 9.
expermintally determined structure of co2-v at 43 gpa showing partially collapsed arrangement of co4 tetrahedra.
a) santoro et al.
(2012); b) datchi et al.
(2012).
reproduced with permission.
figure 10.
phase diagram for co2.
the light grey line is an estimated earth geotherm.
adapted from litasov et al.
(2011).
figure 11.  β-cristabolite and layered structures of co2 predicted at pressures above 200 gpa.
(a) and (b) show the fcc oxygen sublatice and (c) and (d) show the carbon sublattice.
adapted from lee et al.
(2009).
figure 12.
calculated p-v equations of state of co2, c, and o to ultrahigh (tpa) pressures (t=0k).
the volume change associated with the calculated breakdown of co2 to elemental c and o is indicated.
the lower pressure range is shown in the inset (j. montoya, unpublished).
figure 13.
predicted high-pressure structure of co with the cmcm layered structure.
the grey and red spheres represent c and o atoms, respectively, and the yellow spheres identify the six-membered ring in the structure.
this represents only one of several high-pressure structures predicted for co under pressure (from sun et al.
2011).
figure 14.
(a) predicted structures of high-pressure polymorphs of caco3: a) post-aragonite (stable at 42 to 137 gpa); b) c2221 phase (stable at > 137 gpa); c) p-t phase, probably stable in a narrow pressure range of a few gpa between aragonite and post-aragonite.
from (oganov et al.
2006).
d) and e) enthalpies of candidate structures of caco3 as a function of pressure, in ev per formula unit, relative to post-aragonite.
from oganov et al.
(2006).
figure 15.
predicted structures of stable high-pressure phases of mgco3: a) post-magnesite phase ii; b) phase iii; c) pna21-20 structure.
from (oganov et al.
2008).
figure 16.
experimentally determined structure of the high-pressure ferromagnesium carbonate phase with space group p21/c.
(co4)4- tetrahedral appear in green and magnesium atoms are shown as violet spheres (boulard et al.
2011).
figure 17 (a) energy variation as a function of the t-o-t angle (red dashed line = si; black dotted line = c).
calculations were performed on h6t2o7 molecules; at each angle all t-o distances and o-t-o valence angles were optimized.
(b) the minimum energy configuration of c2o7 has a 123.6° c-o-c angle.
from (oganov et al.
2008).
figure 18.
infrared and raman spectra (right insert) of mixed silicate and co2 showing the formation of the high pressure silicon carbonate phase.
a schematic representation of the original silicate structure is shown in the left inset (santoro et al.
2011).
figure 19.
observed and predicted framework silicates with sio4 tetrahedra (red), sio6 octahedra (blue), alkali cations (yellow spheres), and alkaline earth cations (green spheres) might represent carbonate-silicate structures at elevated temperature and pressure.
structures are shown in views parallel and perpendicular to layers of tetrahedral groups.
(a) sodium silicate, na4si2visi4ivo14; (b) predicted calcium germanate-type, ca2si2visi5ivo16; (c) wadeite-type k4si2visi6ivo18; (d) benitoite-type ba2si2visi6ivo18; (e) barium germanate-type ba2si2visi6ivo18; (f) sodium silicate, na4si2visi6ivo18; (g) predicted beryl-type ba2si2visi6ivo18; (h) sodium-calcium silicate, na1.8ca1.1sivisi5ivo14.
(from hazen et al.
1996).
﻿chapter 4: carbon mineral evolution
introduction
the discovery of the extreme antiquity of specific minerals through radiometric dating (e.g., strutt 1910), coupled with norman l. bowen’s recognition of a deterministic evolutionary sequence of silicate minerals in igneous rocks (bowen 1915, 1928), implies that earth’s crustal mineralogy has changed dramatically through more than 4.5 billion years of planetary history.
detailed examination of the mineralogical record has led to a growing realization that varied physical, chemical, and biological processes have resulted in a sequential increase in diversification of the mineral kingdom.
this diversification has been accompanied by significant changes in the near-surface distribution, compositional range (including minor and trace elements), size, and morphology of minerals (ronov et al.
1969; nash et al.
1981; zhabin 1981; meyer 1985; wenk and bulakh 2004; hazen et al.
2008, 2009, 2011).
variation in earth’s mineralogical character thus reflects the tectonic, geochemical, and biological evolution of earth’s near-surface environment (bartley and kah, 2004; hazen et al.
2009, 2012; grew and hazen 2010a, 2010b; mcmillan et al.
2010; krivovichev 2010; grew et al.
2011; tkachev 2011).
the mineral kingdom’s evolutionary narrative shares many features with the increased complexity inherent within other evolving systems, including the nucleosynthesis of elements and isotopes, the prebiotic synthesis of organic molecules, biological evolution through darwinian natural selection, and the evolution of social and material culture (hazen and eldredge 2010).
in particular, well-known biological phenomena such as diversification, punctuation, and extinction appear to be common traits within a wide range of complex, evolving systems.
perhaps more than any other element, carbon exemplifies these processes of “mineral evolution.” four episodes outline major events in the mineral evolution of carbon: (1) the synthesis of the first mineral, likely diamond, and perhaps a dozen other “ur-minerals” in the cooling envelopes of active aging stars; (2) the formation of carbon-bearing materials in the condensing solar nebula, as preserved in chondrite and achondrite meteorites; (3) the diversification of carbon mineralogy through physical and chemical processes in the dynamic crust and mantle; and (4) the profound influence of biospheric evolution on earth’s near-surface carbon mineralogy.
hazen et al.
(2008) further divided the latter three eras into 10 stages of earth’s mineral evolution.
here we review each of these stages of carbon mineral evolution (table 1).
stages of carbon mineral evolution
the story of carbon mineralogy began more than 13 billion years ago in the gaseous envelopes of the first generation of large stars.
prior to the first large energetic stars, perhaps at a time when the universe was a few million years old, there had never been a place that was both dense enough with mineral-forming elements and also cool enough to condense crystals.
but when a dying star explodes into a supernova, or when an asymptotic giant branch star sheds its outer envelope in an intense stellar wind, the star’s element-rich gaseous envelope expands and rapidly cools, the outer layers cooling first.
hazen et al.
(2008) speculate that the first mineral was diamond (possibly co-precipitated with lonsdaleite), which condensed in carbon-rich zones at temperatures below about 3700°c.
next came graphite at a slightly cooler 3200°c.
diamond and graphite were the first of the “ur-minerals”—the dozen or so mineral species that formed prior to the first stellar nebulae, planets, and moons.
in addition to diamond and graphite there are at least two other carbon-bearing ur-minerals, the iron and silicon carbides cohenite and moissanite, as well as possible nano-particles of titanium, iron, molybdenum, and zirconium carbides.
these carbides have crystallization temperatures that are almost as high as diamond, so in the zones of an exploding star where carbon mixed with silicon or iron, carbides would have formed readily.
this relative abundance of carbon-bearing phases among the dozen or so ur-minerals thus reflects the carbon-rich composition of stellar envelopes.
ur-minerals are concentrated in so-called “dense molecular clouds,” which are vast, cold volumes of the galaxy where hydrogen, helium, and mineral-bearing dust achieve densities of 102 to 104 particles per cubic centimeter, compared to only 1 particle per cubic centimeter in the interstellar voids of the milky way galaxy (williams et al.
2000).
the ur-minerals are present as nanometer- to micron-sized particles in the dust grains, some of which are preserved in the fine-grained matrix of chondritic meteorites.
these grains can be isolated and identified by their anomalous isotopic compositions (alexander 1990, 1993; nittler 2003; messenger et al.
2003, 2006; stroud et al.
2004; mostefaoui and hoppe 2004; vollmer et al.
2007; jones 2007).
second-generation stars and their associated planets arise through gravitational clumping of this primitive nebular material.
diamond and other carbon-bearing ur-minerals may persist for billions of years, but they are not the dominant c-rich species in molecular clouds.
astronomical observations employing millimeter-wave spectroscopy reveal distinctive absorption spectra from more than 160 different small molecular species, primarily organic molecules (allamandola et al.
1989; ehrenfreund and charnley 2000; allamandola and hudgins 2003; kwok 2009; for a list see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/list_of_interstellar_and_circumstellar_molecules).
indeed, in the cryogenic temperature regime of the dense molecular cloud, several of the more abundant c-bearing molecules, including co, co2, and ch4, may condense onto dust particles to form their own ices, and thus may represent an additional, if ephemeral, source of pre-solar mineralogical diversity.
the era of earth’s accretion
the first stages of earth’s mineral evolution—diversification beyond the dozen ur-minerals (including the carbon-bearing phases diamond, lonsdaleite, graphite, moissanite, and cohenite; hazen et al.
2013)—began approximately 4.57 billion years ago and are preserved in the rich record of meteorites.
these diverse objects reveal mineral-forming processes that occurred in the solar nebula prior to the formation of earth and other planets.
the mineralogical evolution of meteorites can be divided into two distinct stages—first the primitive chondrites, with approximately 60 different primary condensate phases, and then the diverse achondrite meteorites with more than 250 different minerals, which reflect planetesimal differentiation and subsequent alteration by aqueous, thermal, and shock processes (hazen et al.
2008; mccoy 2010).
stage 1—primary chondrite minerals.
unaltered type 3 chondrite meteorites, which represent the most primitive stage of planetary evolution (mccoy 2010), include a variety of carbon-rich stony meteorites that formed by agglomeration of fine-grained nebular material (brearley and jones 1998; weisberg et al.
2006).
macpherson (2007) defined “primary” chondrite minerals as phases that formed directly through condensation, melt solidification, or solid-state recrystallization following the earliest stages of nebular heating by the sun.
these phases include all of the original ur-minerals, but the only new crystalline carbon-bearing phase reported among the approximately 60 known primary chondritic minerals is the iron-nickel carbide haxonite [(fe,ni)23c6].
this mineral has not yet been identified in terrestrial rocks and is known only from meteorites (brearley and jones 1998) but cohenite (fe,ni,co)3c and other fe-based carbides are also found in lunar soils and rocks (goldstein et al.
1976).
carbon-containing minerals constitute a volumetrically trivial fraction of most chondrites.
note, however, that type 3 carbonaceous chondrites incorporate all but the most volatile of the 83 stable geochemical elements in roughly their cosmochemical abundances.
carbon, as the fourth most abundant element in the cosmos (after hydrogen, helium, and oxygen), is thus present in significant concentrations, primarily as complex suites of condensed organic molecules that comprise as much as 5 weight percent of some meteorites (grady et al.
2002; sephton 2002; martins et al.
2007; herd et al.
2011) and is also particularly widespread as nanodiamond with a mean size ~2.6 nm and abundance reaching 0.15 weight percent (grady et al 2002).
schmitt-kopplin et al.
(2010) report extreme molecular diversity in these meteorites: “tens of thousands of different molecular compositions and likely millions of diverse structures.” these varied molecular species presumably constitute the dominant primordial carbon source that was subsequently processed during the accretion and differentiation of earth and other terrestrial planets and moons.
stage 2—altered chondrite and achondrite meteorites.
the next stage of carbon mineral evolution arose as a consequence of the gravitational accumulation of chondrites into growing planetesimals, with associated alteration by aqueous, thermal, and shock processes.
these modes of mineral alteration are reflected in approximately 150 different mineral species identified in altered chondrites (rubin 1997a, 1997b; brearley and jones 1998; brearley 2006; macpherson 2007).
these events, which characterized perhaps the first 10 to 20 million years of the solar nebula, resulted in a number of new carbon-bearing minerals, notably the first carbonates (as well as hydroxide and sulfate minerals) as a consequence of low-temperature (typically < 100°c) aqueous alteration.
carbonates are especially abundant as veins, isolated grains, and brecciated fragments in the rare ci chondrites, which typically contain ~5 weight percent rhombohedral carbonates, predominantly dolomite, but also calcite (including mg-, fe-, and mn-rich varieties), magnesite, and siderite (fredriksson and kerridge 1988).
carbonates are also common in cm chondrites; calcite predominates in these materials, although dolomite and minor aragonite are also known (kerridge and bunch 1979; barber 1981).
as planetesimals grew to diameters greater than 100 kilometers, they experienced compaction, melting, and differentiation into an iron metal-rich core and silicate mantle.
mineralogical diversity increased as a result of variable oxygen fugacity, volatile content, aqueous fluid ph and salinity, variable heat sources, and impact events of ever greater intensity (mccoy et al.
2006).
additional diversity was driven by the fractionation of silicate melts by partial melting, crystal settling, and potential liquid immiscibility (shukolyukov and lugmair 2002; wadhwa et al.
2006).
diamond, lonsdaleite, and graphite, and the iron-nickel carbides cohenite and haxonite, represent important accessory phases in many iron meteorites, and reflect the fractionation of at least some carbon into reduced, refractory core minerals.
note, however, that the total carbon content of iron meteorites rarely exceeds 0.1 weight percent (e.g., jarosewich 1990).
impact shock metamorphism may have also acted to modify significantly some carbon minerals (langenhorst and deutsch 2012).
for example, the shock transition of graphite to diamond or lonsdaleite had been inferred by a number of researchers (hanneman et al.
1967; masaitis et al.
1972; carlisle and braman 1991; russell et al.
1992; ross et al.
2011) prior to direct observation of the frozen solid-state transformation in samples from meteor craters (langenhorst et al.
1999, el goresy et al.
2001).
in a number of these shocked samples, diamond/lonsdaleite-type phases with a disordered stacking sequence preserve the hexagonal crystal form of graphite.
carbonate minerals are also known to express a range of shock metamorphic textural changes and, ultimately, volatilization under the influence of hypervelocity impacts, notably reflected in the release of co2 (martinez et al.
1998; agrinier et al.
2001; jones et al 2000; ivanov and deutsch 2002; deutsch and langenhorst 2007).
however, no novel carbonate minerals associated with shocked meteorites have been documented.
of the total of approximately 250 mineral species that are known to occur in all types of meteorites (e.g., mason 1967; rubin 1997a, 1997b; brearley and jones 1998; gaffey et al.
2002; macpherson 2007), only about a dozen are carbon bearing.
additional carbon mineral diversification had to await significant reworking of earth’s outer layers by a variety of physical, chemical, and biological processes.
the era of crust and mantle processing
the billion years following planetary accretion was a time of intense reworking of earth’s outer gaseous, liquid, and solids layers.
a succession of giant impacts, punctuated by the moon-forming collision of mars-sized theia at ~4.55 ga, must have had a profound influence on earth’s near-surface mineralogy.
the planet’s volatile content, including carbon, may have been drastically reduced and, for a time, an ocean of magma encircled the globe (tonks and melosh 1993; ruzicka et al.
1999; touboul et al.
2007).
the subsequent three stages of earth’s mineral evolution reflect the influences of a complex combination of igneous, metamorphic, and tectonic processes.
stage 3—igneous rock evolution.
following earth’s accretion, and again for perhaps half a billion years following the moon-forming event, the mineralogical diversity of earth evolved primarily by crystallization of igneous rocks (bowen 1915, 1928), supplemented by a steady bombardment of asteroidal and cometary material.
however, many details of those processes, especially the composition and differential role of volatiles that would contribute to or even dominate formation of the oceans, atmosphere, and near-surface fluids (the “exosphere”), remain uncertain.
carbon does not play a significant role in bowen’s classic reaction series, nor is it obvious how the carbon content of primitive volatiles affected the evolution of magmas through fractional crystallization, crystal-liquid separation, and other physical and chemical igneous processes (though see manning et al.
2013; ni and keppler 2013; jones et al.
2013; sephton and hazen 2013).
we therefore have little understanding of the processes that first generated significant amounts of carbon minerals or carbonate melts at or near earth’s surface, and what carbon minerals may have been present.
meteorites and comets would have continued to provide a small but steady supply of a few carbon minerals to earth’s surface: graphite, nano-diamonds, moissanite, iron carbides, and minor carbonates, along with much more significant quantities of carbon dioxide and varied organic species.
the first carbon minerals to form at or near earth’s surface seem likely to have been restricted to graphite through subsurface reactions of reduced c-o-h fluids (rumble and hoering 1986; rumble et al.
1986; manning et al.
2013) and the rhombohedral carbonates, predominantly in the mg-ca-fe-mn system (i.e., magnesite, calcite, siderite, dolomite, ankerite, rhodochrosite, and kutnohorite; hazen et al.
2013).
one possibility for earth’s hadean and archean eon carbon mineralization is the generation of carbonate melts, perhaps through immiscibility in the upper mantle.
however, no evidence for paleoarchean (much less hadean) carbonatites is known to have survived (jones et al.
2013).
carbonatites appear to have increased steadily in volume through earth history from the 2.609 ga ± 6 ma (neoarchean) siilinjärvi carbonatite to the present (veizer et al 1992; jones et al.
2013), with the majority of older (proterozoic and phanerozoic eon) carbonatites preserved as intrusive bodies.
this temporal distribution may reflect a preservational bias resulting from the rapid chemical degradation of carbonatite lava flows.
only one carbonatite volcano, oldoinyo lengai in tanzania, is active today, and its carbonate mineralogy alters rapidly when in contact with the atmosphere, because the alkali carbonates are water-soluble (genge et al.
2001).
such rapid weathering, however, would source an array of variably alkaline fluids, such as those that drain into alkaline lake natron, which could result in precipitation of carbonate mineral salts.
indeed, the major hurdle in documenting earth’s carbon mineral evolution prior to the neoarchean (~2.8 ga) is the extensive alteration, and general rarity, of earth’s early rock record (e.g., papineau 2010).
no outcrops with an unambiguous age older than about 4 billion years survive.
even if relatively unaltered early hadean samples are found, for example in the guise of earth meteorites on the moon (armstrong et al.
2002; chapman 2002; jakosky et al.
2004), it is unlikely that carbon minerals will be found.
consequently, models of the genesis of earth’s earliest carbonates must remain speculative.
barring a significant role of igneous carbonate production, however, aqueous precipitation appears to be the most likely source of earth’s earliest carbonates.
evidence for early oceans may be found in the oldest known fragments of earth, detrital zircon grains with ages of 4.4 to 4.0 ga extracted from archean quartzites in western australia.
these zircon crystals preserve oxygen isotope ratios characteristic of relatively cool, wet host rocks—possibly evidence for early granitic continental crust (harrison et al.
2005; cavosie et al.
2005; hopkins et al.
2008, 2010) or pre-continental mafic to ultramafic crust (shirey et al.
2008).
wet crust also implies an early ocean, perhaps by 4.4 ga.
such an early appearance of the hydrosphere is consistent with rapid volcanic outgassing and fluid-rock interactions that would have released initial atmospheric components, predominately n2, co2, and h2o, with minor h2s (e.g., holland 1984).
the immediate mineralogical consequence of these interactions would have been significant serpentinization in earth’s mafic crust, as well as the first significant production of clay minerals, with magnesite as a possible accessory mineral.
an additional consequence of early crustal weathering may have been a rapid increase in the salinity of the warm, slightly acidic oceans (hardie 1996; 2003; lowenstein et al.
2001; dickson 2002).
under such conditions, the ph and ionic composition would have been the most important factors that might have controlled carbonate precipitation in the hadean or paleoarchean oceans.
the ph of these most ancient environments would have been a critical constraint on carbonate formation, because the speciation of carbon dioxide in natural waters is strongly governed by ph.
under even mildly acidic conditions, carbon dioxide is present primarily as aqueous co2 and as carbonic acid, which would have inhibited precipitation of carbonate minerals.
another critical constraint on carbonate precipitation would have come from the ionic composition of earth’s surface fluids.
one can speculate that strongly reducing conditions of the earliest earth would have resulted in copious amounts of reduced iron, such that siderite may have been the primary carbonate mineral in both terrestrial and marine settings.
siderite formation points to at least four specialized chemical conditions: (1) the presence of aqueous fe2+; (2) anoxic ocean water with oxygen fugacity < 10-68 to prevent iron removal by precipitation of ferric iron oxide-hydroxides; (3) low sulfide and sulfate ions, which would otherwise lead to pyrite precipitation; and (4) dissolved aqueous hco3- (moore et al.
1992; ohmoto et al.
2004).
alternatively, under early earth’s substantially higher heat flows, both oceanic basalts and their hydrothermal weathering products would have contained substantially more magnesium, suggesting a potentially greater importance of magnesite.
in fact, mozley (1989) showed that archean siderite compositions appear to reflect faithfully the aqueous environments in which they form.
fresh water precipitation yields relatively pure feco3, whereas formation in a saline environment produces siderite with significant mg and ca substitution for fe—compositional effects that reflect the differences in ionic composition of terrestrial and marine waters.
stage 4—granitization.
carbon mineral evolution must have been significantly influenced by the gradual formation of cratons, with their suites of relatively low-density siliceous rocks generated by eutectic melting of mafic and ultramafic lithologies, including tonalite-trondhjemite-granodiorite (ttg), granodiorite-granite-monzogranite (ggm), and high-k syenite-granite (sg) suites (smithies and champion 2000; smithies et al.
2003; zegers 2004).
the nature of this earliest continental crust probably differed both petrologically and tectonically from that of today (see, however, hopkins et al.
2008, 2010).
tectonic activity prior to 3.5 ga may have been dominated by vertical processes through deep mantle plumes, rather than today’s predominantly lateral tectonics (e.g., van kranendonk 2011).
surface relief of the thin, hot, principally basaltic crust would have been correspondingly low, and the exposed surface was likely subject to both intense weathering and intense mechanical erosion (dott 2003), notably from rapid cycling (< 8 hours) of tides generated by the much closer moon (lathe 2006; varga et al.
2006).
in such an environment, significant terrestrial deposition of carbonate minerals seems unlikely.
an important mineralogical consequence of granitization was the generation of eutectic fluids concentrated in rare pegmatophile elements and the eventual deposition of complex pegmatites.
these processes of element selection and concentration are likely to have taken considerable time (e.g., grew and hazen 2009, 2010b); one of the oldest known complex pegmatite, the tanco pegmatite in manitoba, canada, is 2.67 billion years old (london 2008).
carbonate minerals are not dominant species in complex pegmatites, but a few rare species including niveolanite [nabeco3(oh).2h2o] and zabuyelite (li2co3) exemplify the striking mineral diversification that is possible with the formation of complex pegmatites.
stage 5—plate tectonics.
by 3.0 ga, or perhaps significantly earlier, lateral tectonics and continent formation had begun on earth (e.g., harrison et al.
2005; workman and hart 2005; shirey et al.
2008; silver and behn 2008; shirey and richardson 2011; van kranendonk 2011).
the initiation of plate tectonics, especially the beginning of large-scale subduction and the associated crustal reworking and arc volcanism, had significant mineralogical consequences.
on the one hand, large-scale hydrothermal reworking of the crust and upper mantle associated with volcanogenic processes at subduction zones and ridges generated the first massive sulfide deposits and associated precious metal concentrations (sangster 1972; hutchinson 1973).
these ore bodies arise as hydrothermal solutions interact with many cubic kilometers of rock (barnes and rose 1998)—fluids that selectively dissolve and concentrate incompatible elements and thus lead to novel mineralization.
on the other hand, this modern plate tectonic cycle also generated, for the first time, buoyant continental crust that resulted in substantial amounts of subaerially exposed crust, as well as potentially extensive shallow marine continental shelves.
the combination of these factors may have, in turn, fundamentally changed carbonate mineralization in the marine realm.
at atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations potentially 100 times present atmospheric levels (kasting 1987; kasting et al.
1993) the acidity of terrestrial rainwater would have contrasted sharply with that of marine environments, whose ph would have been buffered by hydrothermal weathering reactions at mid-ocean ridges.
subaerially exposed continents would have experienced extensive chemical weathering and the transport of these weathering products to the shallow ocean.
because chemical weathering of silicate minerals produces bicarbonate (hco3-) as the conjugate base to carbonic acid, extensive continental weathering would result in enhanced delivery of bicarbonate to the oceans.
enhanced delivery of bicarbonate would have come at the expense of the acidity generated by equilibration of natural waters with elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide.
neutralization of terrestrial waters through chemical weathering and the subsequent delivery of bicarbonate to the marine system would have acted as an effective buffer of marine ph, and would have allowed marine carbonate saturation to increase to the extent that it was balanced by marine alkalinity.
along with increased carbonate saturation state, another consequence of cratonization was the generation, perhaps for the first time, of extensive shallow marine shelves.
these shallow marine environments would have experienced systematically greater degrees of solar heating and wave agitation, both of which drive local carbonate saturation states higher via degassing of carbon dioxide.
in epicratonic environments, which experience reduced advective interchange with the open ocean, evaporative concentration of shallow marine waters can further raise carbonate saturation states.
together, these processes would have yielded, perhaps for the first time, an abundance of environments conducive to carbonate mineral formation.
finally, it was within these shallow marine environments that light-dependent (i.e.
photosynthetic-bearing) benthic microbial mats (noffke 2011)—and their complex relationship with both carbonate mineralization and carbon species within the ocean-atmosphere system—began to flourish, forever changing earth’s carbon cycle (allwood et al.
2009; dupraz et al.
2009; zerkle et al.
2012).
another possible mineralogical innovation associated with the stabilization of continental shelves may have been the first extensive deposition of methane hydrates (hazen et al.
2013).
this as yet unnamed clathrate mineral is today one of the crust’s most abundant and widely distributed carbon minerals (kvenvolden 1995).
most researchers cite methanogenic microbes and the degradation of buried organic matter as the principal sources of methane, though some advocates postulate a significant abiotic mantle source for some crustal methane deposits (gold 1999; kenney et al.
2001; kutcherov et al.
2002; sephton and hazen 2013).
consequently, methane hydrate may have first occurred early in earth’s history, perhaps as early as stage 3.
the most important potential consequences of plate tectonics on carbon mineralogy relate to subduction of carbon, notably carbon-rich sediments.
the sequestration of carbonates and organic matter has undoubtedly played, and continues to play, a major and evolving role in earth’s carbon cycle (hayes and waldbauer 2006; kah and bartley 2011; dasgupta 2013).
the archean eon saw a significantly smaller volume of carbonate mineralization than today, but what there was likely dissociated during subduction as a consequence of the steeper geothermal gradient (e.g., zhu and ogasawara 2002; manning et al.
2013; jones et al.
2013).
however, the lower temperature gradient of today’s subduction zones may preclude carbonate dissociation, with limestone and dolomite recycled into earth’s deep interior (kraft et al.
1991; gillet 1993; seto et al.
2008).
the era of the evolving biosphere
the evolution of earth’s near-surface carbon mineralogy, notably the diversity and distribution of carbonate minerals, is intertwined with the origin and evolution of life.
in this respect, the co-evolving geosphere and biosphere transformed earth.
three principal sequential episodes frame this story.
with the origins of life and the rise of chemolithoautotrophic microbial communities by ~3.5 ga, earth’s surface environments saw an acceleration of certain mineral-forming processes, notably our earliest evidence for marine carbonate precipitation.
then, coincident with increased continental growth, the rise of photosynthetic organisms saw an increase in both organic and inorganic carbon formation, which culminated in the great oxidation event (goe) at ~2.4 ga.
the goe represents a fundamental shift in the oxidation state of earth’s surface that dramatically altered the near-surface geochemical environment and ultimately led to thousands of new mineral species.
the goe also marked the onset of a nearly 1.5 billion year period of progressive oxygenation of earth’s surface that highlights the complexity of physical, chemical, and biological interactions during carbonate mineral formation.
finally, the innovation of skeletal biomineralization at ~0.6 ga irreversibly altered the carbon cycle and, consequently, the nature and distribution of carbonate minerals.
stage 6—the origins of life and the rise of chemolithoautotrophs.
life emerged on earth by the paleoarchean era (> 3.5 ga); however, the influence of life on earth’s mineral diversity appears to have been minimal prior to the mesoproterozoic era (~1.8 to 1.6 ga).
the earliest cellular consortia were chemolithoautotrophs that exploited redox couples already present in earth’s dynamic near-surface geochemical environment.
life appears to have survived by accelerating favorable oxidation-reduction reactions that were otherwise kinetically inhibited.
it is important to bear in mind that true catalysts allow reactions that are thermodynamically favorable to take place despite kinetic barriers to their occurrence.
catalysts (including chemolithoautotrophic microbes) thus speed the approach to thermodynamic equilibrium, but do not alter that final equilibrium.
banded iron formations (bifs) may represent the most dramatic of these microbial precipitates (e.g., laberge 1973; anbar and holland 1992; konhauser et al.
2002, 2007; kappler et al.
2005).
bifs, which constitute a major source of iron ore, are among the earliest archean sedimentary formations (as old as 3.85 ga) and they occur in pulses through the archean-proterozoic boundary at ~2.45 ga (isley and abbott 1999; klein 2005).
it should be noted, however, that some bifs may have an abiotic origin through hydrothermal processes (jacobsen and pimentel-close 1988; kimberley 1989; bau and möller 1993; klein 2005).
in any event, the majority of bifs appear to have precipitated from colloidal or gel sio2 that contained aqueous ferric and ferrous iron as well as dissolved na+, k+, mg2+, ca2+, and hco3- (klein 1974).
redox and ph variations led to three contrasting mineralogies: a quartz-hematite-magnetite oxide facies, a pyrite-marcasite-pyrrhotite sulfide facies, and a siderite-ankerite-dolomite-calcite carbonate facies.
oxide facies dominate archean bifs, though sulfide and carbonate facies also occur (e.g., dymek and klein 1988; dauphas et al.
2007).
a number of lines of evidence point to an anoxic surface environment prior to the great oxidation event at ~2.4 ga (holland 1984; farquhar et al.
2001; hazen et al.
2008; sverjensky and lee 2010).
among these many lines of evidence for archean anoxia are: (1) unweathered detrital grains of such redox-sensitive minerals as pyrite, siderite, and uraninite (uo2) in south african and canadian river deposits (rasmussen and buick 1999; england et al.
2002); (2) the absence of a cerium anomaly in the 2.5 ga pronto paleosols (murakami et al.
2001); (3) the absence of fe3+ hydroxides in paleosols older than 2.3 ga (rye et al.
1995; holland and rye 1997); and (4) mass independent fractionation of sulfur isotopes (e.g., farquhar et al.
2000, 2007; ono et al.
2003; papineau et al.
2007).
as noted by sverjensky and lee (2010), significant near-surface fe2+ provided an effective hematite-magnetite redox buffer for much of earth’s earliest history—a buffer that maintained the surface oxygen fugacity at ~10-72 (figure 1).
the near-surface precipitation of ferrous iron carbonates, such as siderite-ankerite deposition exemplified by early archean, highly metamorphosed calc-silicate deposits in >3.7 ga rocks of greenland (rose et al.
1996; dymek and klein 1988) and northern quebec (dauphas et al.
2007), requires a reducing environment with an stp oxygen fugacity < 10-68 at assumed values of co2 fugacity < 10-2 (figure 2).
siderite and ankerite precipitation are thus consistent with other evidence for a highly reducing near-surface archean environment.
note, however, that siderite is lacking in archean paleosols that are contemporaneous with marine fe2+ carbonate precipitation (rye et al.
1995).
this absence of iron carbonates may reflect relatively low concentrations of atmospheric co2.
note, however, that other researchers suggest that atmospheric co2 concentrations were significantly greater than today and experienced significant fluctuations prior to 2.5 ga (e.g., holland 1984; rye et al.
1995; sagan and chyba 1997; kaufman and xiao 2003; kah and riding 2007).
alternatively, ohmoto et al.
(2004) cite the absence of paleosol siderite as possible evidence for trace levels of atmospheric o2, which would have prevented the formation of siderite in soils, even under high co2 concentrations.
indeed, trace element data from black shale deposits suggests that photosynthesis in near-shore (and presumably terrestrial) environments may have acted as local sources of biospheric oxygen in an otherwise anoxic archean world (kendall et al.
2010).
it remains unresolved the extent to which biological activity influenced carbonate mineral formation in the archean eon.
oxygenic photoautotrophs, such as cyanobacteria, are recognized for their ability to raise local ph and carbonate saturation and thereby actively promote carbonate mineral precipitation (thompson and ferris 1990; kranz et al.
2010).
the evolution of oxygenic photoautotrophs, however, appears not to have occurred until some time after 2.7 ga (rasmussen et al.
2008).
similarly, changes in carbonate alkalinity associated with bacterial reduction of mn and sulfate that promote carbonate mineral precipitation (froelich et al.
1979; canfield and raiswell 1991) would not be expected until approximately 2.5 ga, with the development of at least local oxygen oases and their associated redox gradients (kaufman et al.
2007; anbar et al.
2007; kendall et al.
2010).
microbial influence on archean carbonate mineralization is therefore more likely to reflect anoxygenic photoautotrophy (olson and blankenship 2004; westall et al.
2006; johnston et al.
2009) or methanogenesis (battistuzzi et al.
2004; ueno et al.
2006).
although either anoxygenic photoautotrophy or methanogenesis is capable of promoting increased carbonate saturation (kenward et al.
2009; bundeleva et al.
2012), experimental approaches suggest that active mineral precipitation within microbial mats requires not only metabolically increased carbonate saturation, but also the liberation of eps-bound ca during biofilm decomposition (dupraz et al.
2009).
little evidence survives of significant non-ferroan carbonate precipitation prior to about 3.5 ga, when a variety of stromatolitic forms provide unambiguous evidence for at least limited carbonate biomineralization (walter et al.
1980; lowe 1980; buick et al.
1981; byerly et al.
1986; walter 1994; grotzinger and knoll 1999; frankel and bazylinski 2003; allwood et al.
2006; van kranendonk 2006, 2007).
however, these deposits are highly localized and extensive sedimentary carbonate deposits are rare until after 3.0 ga.
even after the appearance of the earliest large-scale carbonate deposits in the ~2.95 ga steep rock group of northwestern ontario (jolliffe 1955; wilks and nisbet 1988; tomlinson et al.
2003), nearly 250 million years passed before the first laterally extensive carbonate platforms at ~2.7 ga (sumner 1997).
increasing carbonate platform development in the late archean eon may reflect increased cratonization and the development of widespread, shallow marine environments with highly elevated carbonate saturation.
indeed it is these early epi- to pericratonal environments that preserve both neomorphic crystal textures characteristic of aragonite precipitation (grotzinger 1989; sumner and grotzinger 2004) as well as the oldest known primary aragonite, which occurs as nanocrystals within dolomitic stromatolites of the 2.72 ga tumbiana formation, western australia (lepot et al.
2008).
carbonate mineral precipitation within these strongly supersaturated waters still may have been limited by regionally low oxygen and elevated concentrations of fe2+, which can effectively inhibit carbonate nucleation (sumner and grotzinger 1996b).
whereas microbial consortia may have played a relatively minor role in the precipitation of carbonates in the paleo- and mesorchean eras, biological organisms appear to have played an increasing role in the neoarchean era, prior to the paleoproterozoic great oxidation event.
the appearance of extensive neoarchean carbonate platforms appears to have promoted marine fluids with elevated carbonate saturation.
at this same time, the evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis would have led to considerably heterogeneity in benthic redox conditions (kaufman et al.
2007; anbar et al.
2007; kendall et al.
2010).
critically, even small amounts of environmental oxygenation would have reduced the inhibitory effect of fe2+ within the water column while driving increased microbial reduction of oxidized phases, which would have further enhanced local carbonate saturation.
evidence for a diverse set of microbe-mineral interactions at this time comes, in part, from petrographic observations in the ~2.52 ga cambellrand platform that record preferential nucleation of fibrous marine carbonate on specific microbial mat elements (sumner 1997).
while microbial consortia may have played a localized role in the precipitation of carbonates, life played a relatively minor role in modifying earth’s archean carbon mineralogy.
that situation changed dramatically following global-scale biologically mediated changes in atmospheric chemistry of the paleoproterozoic great oxidation event.
stage 7—photosynthesis and the great oxidation event.
numerous lines of evidence point to a dramatic rise in atmospheric oxygen concentrations from complete anoxia to perhaps a few percent of modern levels at approximately 2.4 to 2.25 ga (canfield et al.
2000; kump et al.
2001; kasting 2001; kasting and siefert 2002; towe 2002; holland 2002; bekker et al.
2004; barley et al.
2005; catling and claire 2005; papineau et al.
2005, 2007; kump and barley 2007).
this dramatic and relatively sudden change in atmospheric oxygenation marks the rise of oxygenic photosynthesis by cyanobacteria, an increased redox cycling within microbial mats, and is reflected in an unprecedented increase in the diversity of marine carbonate formation (grotzinger and knoll 1999; melezhik et al.
1997).
oxygenation of earth’s surface environments is characterized by large-scale deposition of oxidized hematite-bearing bifs as well as massive manganese oxide deposits in marine environments, some of which are accompanied by the ca-mn carbonate kutnohorite as found in quantity at the mesoproterozoic kalahari manganese fields, north cape province, south africa  (leclerc and weber 1980; dasgupta et al.
1992; roy 2006).
the paleoproterozoic rise in atmospheric oxygen (and concomitant gradual oxygenation of near-surface groundwater) likely represents the single most important event in the diversification of earth’s carbon mineralogy (hazen et al.
2008; mcmillan et al.
2010).
prior to 2.4 ga, anoxic environments at earth’s surface precluded the formation of many carbonate species.
consider the familiar hydrated copper carbonates azurite [cu3(oh)2(co3)2] and malachite [cu2(oh)2co3].
calculations of their stability fields as a function of fo2 and fco2 (figure 3) reveal that these (and many other) divalent copper minerals require fo2 > 10-43 at stp at presumed values of co2 fugacity < 10-2 (e.g., garrels and christ 1965).
however, prior to ~2.4 ga the near-surface environment was constrained by the hematite-magnetite buffer with fo2 ~ 10-72 (figure 1).
consequently, neither azurite nor malachite was stable prior to the great oxidation event.
similar arguments may be applied to the numerous carbonates of u6+, mo6+, hg2+, and other redox sensitive cations (hazen et al.
2009, 2012; mcmillan et al.
2010).
it is interesting to note that most of the thousands of new mineral phases, including more than 100 new carbonate minerals that are associated with near-surface oxidation, did not first appear immediately following atmospheric oxidation at 2.4 ga.
in fact, recent surveys of the first appearances of the minerals of be, b, and hg point to a relatively protracted interval between 2.4 and 1.8 ga with few new minerals, followed by a surprising pulse of mineral diversity between 2.0 and 1.8 ga. hazen et al.
(2012) attributed this feature to mineralization associated with the assembly of the columbia supercontinent, possibly coupled to a protracted interval of gradual subsurface oxidation (mcmillan et al.
2010).
although oxygenation of surface environments remained limited at this time, as evidenced by biomarker evidence supporting photic zone anoxia (brocks et al.
2005), this interval also corresponds to expansion of carbonate-hosted lead-zinc deposits, which reflect increased oxidative weathering, delivery of sulfate to, and bacterial reduction within, marine systems (lyons et al.
2006).
stage 8—the intermediate ocean.
the story of marine carbonate minerals in the aftermath of the goe is complex and largely one of oceanic heterogeneity.
the goe represents a critical threshold beyond which earth surface environments became oxidizing rather than reducing.
yet a second threshold of oxygenation—one necessary to bring a large portion of the oceanic substrate into the oxidative realm—may not have been passed until perhaps the final days of the proterozoic eon.
in the intervening time, marine systems experienced a nearly 2 billion year interval in which earth’s surface experienced only gradual increases in oxygenation (kah and bartley 2011), potentially coupled with conjugate decreases in atmospheric co2 concentration (bartley and kah 2004).
within the marine realm, environmental evolution was reflected in (1) limited oxygenation of surface oceans (brocks et al.
2005; blumenberg et al.
2012); (2) increased riverine delivery of sulfate to surface oceans (kah et al.
2004) and its subsequent microbial reduction, which formed broad regions of euxinia, particularly in near shore, shallow marine environments (shen et al.
2002; poulton et al.
2004; lyons et al.
2009); and (3) the retention of perpetually anoxic, potentially ferruginous, deep oceans (planavsky et al.
2011).
together, restriction of oxygenated environments and development of strong redox gradients resulted in both spatial and temporal heterogeneity within the oceans.
spatial heterogeneity was also facilitated by warm, non-glacial conditions of the mesoproterozoic era (1.6-1.0 ga) and the assembly of the supercontinent of rodinia, both of which favored globally high sea levels that formed vast, shallow, epicratonic seaways.
reduction of advective mixing between these vast epicratonic seaways and open ocean environments, in combination with their low water volumes and a generally long residence time for fluids, produced localized environments that could show rapid chemical change in response to regional hydrodynamic conditions, thereby enhancing the heterogeneity of marine environments.
furthermore, within these varied environments, redox gradients were exploited by largely prokaryotic ecosystems that included both oxygenic and anoxygenic photosynthesizers (dutkiewicz et al.
2003; brocks et al.
2005; blumenberg et al.
2012), a range of bacterial sulfate reducers and disproportionating sulfur oxidizers (canfield and teske 1996; johnston et al.
2005), as well as an active methanogenic community (guo et al., 2012).
the mesoproterozoic era also saw the appearance and diversification in some marine environments of both unicellular and multicellular algae (butterfield et al.
1990; javaux et al.
2004; knoll et al.
2006).
such biological diversification, of planktic algae in particular, appears to have played a critical role in the reorganization and potential stability of the marine carbon cycle (ridgwell et al.
2003; bartley and kah 2004).
ultimately, this confluence of physical, chemical, and biological conditions resulted in a global ocean in which a broad range of local parameters could act individually or in concert to overcome kinetic barriers to carbonate precipitation.
as a result, the heterogeneity of mesoproterozoic oceanic environments is marked by equally heterogeneous carbonate mineralization.
perhaps most striking—and in need of much further study—is the observation that biological and chemical heterogeneity of mesoproterozoic oceans appear to have been reflected in a discrete partitioning of both carbonate crystal form and carbonate mineralogy.
current investigations suggest that seafloor precipitation of fibrous aragonite (figure 4a), which is common in archean and paleoproterozoic oceans, experienced a gradual restriction to peritidal, evaporative environments (kah and knoll 1996; kah et al.
2012), where evaporative concentration may have greatly increased local saturation states.
meanwhile, herringbone calcite (figure 4b) experienced a progressive restriction to deeper water environments.
herringbone calcite is an unusual carbonate morphology, believed to represent neomorphic replacement of high-magnesium calcite (grotzinger and kasting 1993), that consists of elongate crystals in which the c-axis rotates throughout growth, from parallel to perpendicular to crystal elongation.
this unusual mode of crystal growth is most prevalent within archean sea floor precipitates (sumner and grotzinger 1996a, 1996b) and has been attributed both to inhibitory crystal growth effects of fe2+ under conditions of regional anoxia (sumner and grotzinger 1996b) and to increased crystal growth rates associated with the presence of locally elevated concentrations of dissolved inorganic carbon derived from re-mineralized organic matter (tourre and sumner 2000).
in the mesoproterozoic era, extensive precipitation of herringbone carbonate is restricted to deeper water facies, with its presence in platform deposits closely associated with transgressive surfaces (kah et al.
2006, 2009, 2012).
combined, these observations suggest that herringbone carbonate mineralization is strongly linked to oceanic redox gradients.
between these shallow- and deep-water environments, carbonate mineralization appears to be more strongly linked to microbial activity, with finely crystalline calcite precipitates forming both within the water column and within benthic microbial mats.
microbial activity even appears to have fostered the formation of unique carbonate crystal morphologies that are preserved nearly exclusively within the mesoproterozoic era.
“molar-tooth” structure is an enigmatic, precambrian carbonate fabric that consists of variously shaped voids and cracks that formed at or near the sediment-water interface and were filled with a uniform, equant microspar (furniss et al.
1998; james et al.
1998; bishop and sumner 2006; bishop et al.
2006; pollock et al.
2006), referred to as molar-tooth microspar (figure 4c).
molar-tooth cracks likely formed via gas-sediment interaction during the microbial decomposition of sedimentary organic material (furniss et al.
1998; pollock et al.
2006).
void-filling microspar, which consists of uniformly sized spheroidal crystals and associated syntaxial overgrowths, is consistent with formation via spontaneous carbonate nucleation associated with the interaction of pore fluids enriched in dissolved organic matter with the infiltration of supersaturated seawater (pollock et al.
2006).
although molar-tooth microspar has been suggested to have initially formed as either aragonite (bishop and sumner 2006) or vaterite (furniss et al.
1998), experimental precipitation under proterozoic-like conditions (elevated carbonate saturation and low sulfate) produces a mixture of amorphous calcium carbonate (acc) with minor vaterite (goodman and kah 2007).
stage 9—the snowball earth.
characteristic heterogeneity in carbonate mineral formation continued into the neoproterozoic, where marine ocean chemical environments experienced additional modification via continued biotic evolution and as a consequence of dramatic climate fluctuations between about 0.75 and 0.54 ga. during the waning of the proterozoic eon, earth environments are marked by at least three episodes of global glaciation (hoffman et al.
1998; kennedy et al.
1998).
evidence includes (1) low-latitude glacial deposits at or near sea level (young 1995; hoffman and prave 1996; halverson 2005; evans 2006); (2) extreme carbon and sulfur isotope excursions (hoffman et al.
1998; gorjan et al.
2000; hurtgen et al.
2005; fike et al.
2006); (3) deposition of cap carbonates with abundant bottom-nucleated aragonite fans overlying glacial diamictites (fairchild 1993; kennedy 1996; halverson et al.
2005); (4) distributions of fe minerals (young 1976; canfield et al.
2007); and (5) ir anomalies representing glacial cumulates (bodiselitsch et al.
2005).
according to the “snowball earth” scenario (kirschvink 1992; hoffman and schrag 2000), glacial cycles occurred when continents were clustered near the equator so that snow cover triggered runaway albedo feedback, possibly amplified by decreases in atmospheric co2 (ridgwell et al.
2003; donnadieu et al.
2004).
during at least three snowball intervals of approximately 10 million years duration, surface-weathering processes decreased while atmospheric co2 concentrations from volcanoes increased significantly (caldeira and kasting 1992; pierrehumbert 2004).
eventually, increased co2 led to rapid greenhouse warming, ice melting, and rapid deposition of thick aragonite crystal fans, suggesting highly supersaturated seawater.
it is intriguing that melting of methane hydrates (hazen et al.
2013) and the consequent release of methane may have provided a mineralogical accelerant to this period of positive climatic feedback (jacobsen 2001).
glacial melting in the neoproterozoic era was accompanied by a significant rise in atmospheric oxygen to perhaps 15 percent of today’s value (fike et al.
2006; canfield et al.
2007).
resultant increases in clay mineral formation may have had an important influence on the carbon cycle and thus an indirect effect on carbon mineralogy.
atmospheric co2 enrichment, greenhouse warming, and oxygenation combined to enhance production of clay minerals in soils, for example by the bio-weathering of feldspar and mica (schwartzman and volk 1989; paris et al.
1996; barker et al.
1998; ueshima and tazaki 1998; tazaki 2005).
accordingly, kennedy et al.
(2006) describe significant increases in neoproterozoic clay mineral deposition.
increased clay mineral production may have enhanced sequestration of organic carbon, which readily adsorbs onto clay surfaces and can thus be buried in marine sediments (hedges and kiel 1995; mayer et al.
2004).
because the oxidation of organic carbon provides a major sink for atmospheric oxygen, this clay-mediated burial of organic carbon may have indirectly contributed to a final proterozoic rise in atmospheric oxygen, which heralded the evolution of skeletonizing metazoans (knoll and carroll 1999) and the most dramatic diversification of earth’s mineral inventory since the goe.
stage 10—the rise of skeletal biomineralization.
by the beginning of the phanerozoic eon (0.542 ga) biology dominated earth’s carbon mineralogy.
the early cambrian period witnessed an abrupt increase in all major skeletal minerals (runnegar 1987; knoll 2003), including the carbonate minerals calcite, aragonite, and magnesian calcite, which are precipitated by numerous algal and animal phyla, and are volumetrically the most significant biominerals.
in the early paleozoic era, however, non-enzymatic production of carbonate such as microbial carbonate (riding 2002) continued to dominate over skeletal carbonate.
in fact, enzymatic skeletal carbonate production in the cambrian composes < 5% of the volume of marine carbonate (pruss et al.
2010).
it was not until after the great ordovician biodiversification event (gobe; harper 2006; servais et al.
2009) that skeletal carbonate exceeded 15% of the volume of marine carbonate (pruss et al.
2010).
several lines of evidence suggest that changes in earth’s ocean chemistry may have played a fundamental role in the transition from non-enzymatic to enzymatic carbonate deposition.
microbial carbonate production, for instance, is controlled primarily by a combination of ambient carbonate saturation state, the availability of aqueous co2 and hco3, and ph changes within the microbial sheath in response to the photosynthetic uptake of co2 and the conversion of hco3 to co2 via biological carbon concentrating mechanisms (merz 1992; arp et al.
2001; riding and liang 2005).
a dramatic decline in microbial carbonate production in the early paleozoic era (riding 2006a,b) suggests a response in surface waters to a global decrease in pco2 and marine carbonate saturation.
alternatively, it has been suggested that deep-ocean anoxia and the increased anaerobic cycling of organic carbon (fischer et al.
2007; higgins et al.
2009) may have reduced marine carbonate saturation in the early paleozoic era to a point at which enzymatic production of skeletal carbonate may have been prohibitively high (pruss et al.
2010).
in yet another model, the biological diversification of skeletonizing metazoans may have been inhibited prior to the late middle ordovician by deep-ocean anoxia that sequestered bioessential elements, thereby limiting nutrient sources for metazoans that rely on planktonic productivity (servais et al.
2009).
in this scenario, a sustained increase in skeletonizing metazoans could not have occurred prior to deep ocean ventilation and reduction of dysoxic to anoxic deep waters in the late middle ordovician (cf.
thompson and kah 2012).
the complexity of a world that contains both enzymatic and non-enzymatic carbonate production is further illustrated by the biological and temporal variability in the mineralogy of calcium carbonate precipitated by corals, mollusks, and other invertebrates (harper et al.
1997; knoll 2003; cohen and mcconnaughey 2003; palmer and wilson 2004).
not only are specific carbonate minerals commonly associated with distinct groups of organisms (lowenstam and weiner 1989; simkiss and wilbur 1989), but organisms themselves can contain numerous different carbonate minerals, such as the remarkable example of the biological adaptation of magnesium carbonate in lenses of some phacopid trilobites with compound eyes (figure 5).
each lens is a single crystal of calcite with the hexagonal c-axes precisely oriented perpendicular to the lens.
furthermore, each lens is radially zoned with variable mg/ca to correct for chromatic aberration (clarkson and levi-setti 1975; lee et al.
2007).
the phanerozoic rock record also preserved a series of temporal transitions in carbonate mineralogy.
calcite mineralization dominates the fossil record from the early cambrian period through the early carboniferous period (~540 to 300 ma), but a dramatic and rather sudden shift to increased aragonite biomineralization is observed in fossils from the mid-mississippian period through the mid-jurassic period (~300 to 150 ma).
calcite again became the dominant biocarbonate after the mid-jurassic until approximately 35 million years ago, when aragonite biomineralization once again became common.
the origin of these so-called “calcite-aragonite sea” intervals remains controversial.
because temporal variation in the abundance of calcite and aragonite mineralogies is observed in both skeletal and non-skeletal carbonates (sandberg 1983, 1985; wilkinson and givens 1986), it is generally agreed that these temporal variations reflect global-scale changes in ocean chemistry.
additional correlation between “calcite-aragonite sea” intervals and the mg/ca concentration of marine minerals (hardie 1996) suggests that marine mg/ca ratio (mg/ca < 2 favoring calcite; mg/ca > 2 favoring magnesian-calcite and aragonite) may play a primary role in this mineralogical transition.
marine mg/ca ratio may also have substantial influence on the production of skeletal calcite versus arragonite.
stanley and hardie (1998) showed that calcite-producing organisms are dominant components of the ecosystem during “calcite sea” intervals, and vice versa, which might reflect the differential stability of mineralogical phases, more robust mineralization of skeletons in thermodynamic stability with the ocean (ries 2010), or even an evolutionary favorability within organisms whose skeletons are in equilibrium with the surrounding ocean (porter 2007).
the interplay between ocean chemistry, biology, and carbonate mineralogy has continued through the phanerozoic eon.
the evolution of planktonic calcifying organisms in the mesozoic era marked the first time in earth’s history when deep-ocean carbonate deposition was comparable to that of epicontinental environments (ridgwell 2005).
widespread deposition of carbonate from planktic organisms not only buffers the isotopic composition of the marine carbonate system (bartley and kah 2004; ridgwell and zeebe 2005), but may also buffer the global exchange of co2 to an extent that future snowball events—such as that experienced by earth in the late neoproterozoic era—would be impossible (ridgwell et al.
2003).
in addition to the abundant and critically important carbonate minerals, phanerozoic carbon mineralogy is enhanced by dozens of organic minerals (see table 7 in hazen et al.
2013), which have been identified from coal, black shales, oil shales, guano and other cave deposits, decayed wood, cacti, and other carbon-rich sources.
biologically-derived organic molecular minerals include the remarkable ni-porphyrin abelsonite (ni2+c31h32n4), the purine uricite (c5h4n4o3), several hydrocarbons ranging in size from kratochvilite (c13h10) to evenkite (c24h48).
more than two-dozen minerals with organic anions, notably oxalate (c2o4)2- are also known from phanerozoic deposits.
conclusions: unresolved questions in carbon mineral evolution
much remains to be learned about the mineral evolution of carbon minerals, particularly with respect to carbonate mineral evolution.
rhombohedral mg-ca-fe-mn carbonates are present in sedimentary, igneous, and metamorphic rocks throughout earth history, but the paragenetic modes, production rates, and depositional environments of these carbonates have changed significantly.
for example, biologically mediated phanerozoic deposition of carbonates must play a significant, though as yet unresolved, role in the changing global carbon cycle through time.
in particular, the onset of massive deposition of global platform carbonates from the mesozoic era, coupled with a gradually cooling geotherm and consequent stabilization of carbonates in subduction environments, must be altering the impact of subduction-mediated sequestration of carbon.
the possibly significant long-term consequences to the global carbon cycle are not known.
other aspects of carbon mineral evolution relate to (1) the incorporation of numerous trace and minor elements, including a variety of redox sensitive elements, into rhombohedral carbonates; (2) isotopic variation in carbon and other elements; and (3) temporal changes in the morphology of carbonates, especially the richly varied crystal forms of calcite.
each of these aspects of carbon mineralogy hold the potential to reveal much about the co-evolution of the geosphere and biosphere.
it is also intriguing to speculate on the carbon mineral evolution of other planets and moons.
in our solar system titan presents an especially intriguing case.
at surface temperatures < 100 k, and with a near-surface composition dominated by hydrocarbons, titan features lakes of liquid methane and possibly ethane.
in such an environment higher hydrocarbons become likely mineral phases.
for example, glein (2012) has proposed that acetylene could be a common evaporate mineral along the shores of titan’s hydrocarbon lakes.
similar mineralogical oddities might dominate on planets in other star systems with very different metallicity, for example with significantly greater c/o (bond et al.
2008, 2010; carter-bond et al.
2012; michael pagano, personal communication).
in such a system hydrocarbons, carbides, and organo-silanes might dominate relative to carbonate minerals.
in the extreme case, a carbon-rich planet might be dominated by graphite and diamond (madhusudhan et al.
2012).
we conclude that the detailed study of carbon-bearing minerals through deep time can provide an unparalleled window into the tectonic, geochemical, and biological evolution of any terrestrial planet or moon.
figures
figure 1.
the presence of abundant fe2+ in near-surface environments of the archean eon resulted in an effective hematite-magnetite buffer with fo2 at stp constrained to lie near 10-72.
observations of redox sensitive uranium, sulfur, and europium species in archean rocks are consistent with this value of fo2 (hazen et al 2008; sverjensky and lee 2010).
thermodynamic data used to construct this diagram came from the following sources: u-species (shock et al.
1997a); all other aqueous species (shock et al.
1997b); minerals (helgeson et al.
1978).
figure 2.
ferrous iron carbonate stability requires log fo2 < -68 at stp, assuming log fco2 < -2.
this value is consistent with the stp hematite-magnetite buffer of log fo2 ~ -72.
the lower dashed line in the diagram at log fo2 = -83.1 represents the lower stability of water at 1 atm h2.
thermodynamic data used to construct this diagram came from the following sources: aqueous species (shock et al.
1997b); minerals (helgeson et al.
1978); the diagram was calculated with the aid of geochemists workbench (bethke 1996).
figure 3.
the stabilities of the copper carbonates azurite and malachite require log fo2 > -43 at stp, assuming log fco2 < -2, which precludes their formation prior to the great oxidation event.
thermodynamic data used to construct this diagram came from the following sources: aqueous species (shock et al.
1997b); cu carbonate minerals (preis & gamsjäger 2002); cu oxide minerals (helgeson et al.
1978); the diagram was calculated with the aid of geochemists workbench (bethke 1996).
figure 4.
differing morphologies of calcium carbonate are found in mesoproterozoic strata and suggest that spatial variation in geochemical conditions may favor the abiotic precipitation of different carbonate minerals.
a) fans and splays of hexagonal, acicular crystals with blunt terminations suggest neomorphic replacement of original aragonite.
b) herringbone carbonate (here under crossed-polars) consists of elongate crystals, whose c-axis rotates from parallel to perpendicular to the elongated growth of the crystal.
it has been interpreted to reflect neomorphic recrystallization of spherulitic crystal clusters, with microdolomite inclusions, which suggest that the original mineralogy may have been magnesian-calcite.
c) homogeneous crystal size distribution of molar-tooth calcite indicates precipitation through spontaneous nucleation and growth events, with limited ostwald ripening.
laboratory experiments suggest original depositional as amorphous calcium carbonate.
long axis is is 2.6 mm in a, 1.37 mm in b, and 6.9 mm in c.
figure 5.
the compound eyes (with “eye shade”) of the trilobite erbenochile erbeni, as with other members of the order phacopidae, incorporate single crystal lenses of calcite with the hexagonal c-axes precisely oriented perpendicular to the lens.
furthermore, each lens is radially zoned with variable mg/ca to correct for chromatic aberration.
photograph courtesy of adam aronson.
﻿the chemistry of carbon in aqueous fluids at crustal and upper-mantle conditions: experimental and theoretical constraints
introduction
carbon can be a major constituent of crustal and mantle fluids, occurring both as dissolved ionic species (e.g., carbonate ions or organic acids) and molecular species (e.g., co2, co, ch4, and more complex organic compounds).
the chemistry of dissolved carbon changes dramatically with pressure (p) and temperature (t).
in aqueous fluids at low p and t, molecular carbon gas species such as co2 and ch4 saturate at low concentration to form a separate phase.
with modest increases in p and t, these molecular species become fully miscible with h2o, enabling deep crustal and mantle fluids to become highly concentrated in carbon.
at such high concentrations, carbon species play an integral role as solvent components and, with h2o, control the mobility of rock-forming elements in a wide range of geologic settings.
the migration of carbon-bearing crustal and mantle fluids contributes to earth’s carbon cycle; however, the mechanisms, magnitudes, and time variations of carbon transfer from depth to the surface remain least understood parts of the global carbon budget (berner 1991, 1994; berner and kothavala 2001)
here we provide an overview of carbon in water-rich crustal and mantle fluids.
we first review the evidence for the presence and abundance of carbon in these fluids.
we then discuss oxidized and reduced carbon, both as solutes in h2o-rich fluids and as major components of miscible co2–ch4–h2o fluids.
our goal is to provide some of the background needed to understand the role of fluids in the deep carbon cycle.
carbon in aqueous fluids of crust and mantle
numerous lines of evidence indicate that carbon may be an important component of crustal and mantle fluids.
fluid inclusions provide direct samples of carbon-bearing fluids from a range of environments.
carbon species in fluid inclusions include molecular gas species (co2, ch4), carbonate ions, and complex organic compounds, including petroleum (roedder 1984).
carbon-bearing fluid inclusions occur in all crustal metamorphic settings, but they have also been reported in samples derived from mantle depths, including nearly pure co2 inclusions in olivine in mantle xenoliths (roedder 1965; deines 2002), inclusions in ultrahigh-pressure metamorphic minerals exhumed from mantle depths (fu et al.
2003b; frezzotti et al.
2011), and carbon-bearing fluid inclusions in diamonds from depths corresponding to more than 5 gpa (navon et al.
1988; schrauder and navon 1993).
the formation of carbon-bearing minerals in fluid-flow features such as veins and segregations are prima facie indications of carbon transport by deep fluids.
environments in which carbonate veins have been observed range from shallow crustal settings to rocks exhumed from subduction zones (gao et al.
2007) and, rarely, mantle xenoliths (demeny et al.
2010).
graphite is also widely observed as a vein mineral, most famously perhaps in the borrowdale graphite deposit of the lake district in the united kingdom (e.g., barrenechea et al.
2009).
the occurrence of c-bearing minerals in metamorphic veins is consistent with the observation that the c content of metamorphic rocks decreases with increasing metamorphic grade.
for example, pelagic clay lithologies (“pelites”) progressively decarbonate during metamorphism: whereas the global average oceanic sediment has 3.01 wt% co2, low-grade metapelites have an average of 2.31 wt% co2, and high-grade metapelites average 0.22 wt% co2 (shaw 1956; plank and langmuir 1998).
the decarbonation correlates with dehydration, clearly demonstrating that prograde metamorphic reactions liberate a fluid phase containing both h2o and carbon as components.
similarly, the development of calc-silicate skarns in carbonate lithologies (einaudi et al.
1981), in which fluid flow induces replacement of carbonate minerals (chiefly calcite) by silicates and oxides, requires liberation of carbon to water-rich fluids.
finally, spring waters discharging from active metamorphic terranes commonly contain carbon derived from depth (irwin 1970; chiodini et al.
1995; chiodini et al.
1999; becker et al.
2008; wheat et al.
2008).
sources of carbon in aqueous fluids of the crust and mantle
the carbon that is incorporated into deep fluids is derived from two sources.
it may be liberated from the host rocks during fluid-rock reaction (“internal sources”), or it may be introduced by mixing with other fluids (“external sources”).
internal carbon sources.
oxidized carbon is incorporated into rocks by primary accumulation and crystallization processes, and by secondary weathering, alteration, or cementation processes.
the dominant primary internal source of oxidized carbon is sedimentary.
pure limestone generated by accumulation of biomineralized calcite (shells, etc.
) contains 44 wt% co2, whereas dolomite contains ~48 wt% co2.
varying amounts of siliciclastic detritus found in “impure” carbonates lowers the co2 concentration.
the carbonate compensation depth limits the accumulation of carbon in pelagic sediments.
but even deep-ocean sedimentary packages contain at least some co2: the global average composition of oceanic sediment entering subduction zones is 3.01 ± 1.44 wt% co2 (plank and langmuir 1998).
in addition, calcite is one of the most common cements found in sandstone.
carbonate minerals are rare products of magmatic crystallization of silicate magmas, though they occur as primary phases in c-rich magmas such as carbonatites and kimberlites (jones et al.
2013).
carbonate minerals have been observed as inclusions in silicate minerals in mantle xenoliths (e.g., mcgetchin and besancon 1973).
near earth’s surface, secondary processes can enrich igneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary lithologies in co2 by weathering and alteration.
on continents, rock weathering extracts co2 from the atmosphere to produce secondary carbonate minerals (urey 1952; berner et al.
1983).
in submarine settings, seafloor alteration processes lead to significant co2 uptake by secondary carbonation of basaltic crust.
for example, fresh mid-ocean ridge basalt (morb) is estimated to contain ~0.15 wt% co2, but during alteration and seafloor weathering the co2 content of the upper 600 m of the oceanic crust may increase to 3.26 wt%, and the average co2 gain by the entire crustal section is elevated to 0.35 wt% (staudigel 2003).
abundant carbonate veins in oceanic serpentinites are observed in core, dredge hauls, and ophiolites, indicating that altered oceanic mantle rocks likewise contain significant carbon (e.g., thompson et al.
1968; thompson 1972; bonatti et al.
1974; bonatti et al.
1980; trommsdorff et al.
1980; morgan and milliken 1996; schrenk et al.
2013).
the most common source of reduced carbon is buried organic material found in sedimentary lithologies.
carbon in sedimentary basins is present in a variety of species and phases that span a substantial range of redox states.
familiar organic compounds found in sedimentary basins include the fossil fuels such as coal, petroleum, and natural gas, which typically have their origins in the transformation of detrital organic remains of life (sephton and hazen 2013).
the biomolecules that accumulate with mineral grains in sediments and sedimentary rocks are those compounds that are most resistant to microbial modification.
the most refractory compounds are membrane molecules of microbes and lignin molecules from plants, which can be transformed into petroleum or coal, respectively, if the subsurface geologic conditions are conducive.
through a complex series of reactions, these compounds may transform to graphite during crustal metamorphism.
this graphite can be an important source for carbon in metamorphic fluids.
condensed zero-valent and reduced carbon occurs in mantle rocks in a variety of forms (mathez et al.
1984).
it is found as a free phase as graphite or diamond, or as carbide minerals such as moissanite, cementite or other fe–c compounds (dasgupta and hirschmann 2010; shiryaev et al.
2011; hazen et al.
2013).
small amounts of carbon may dissolve in mantle minerals (tingle and green 1987; tingle et al.
1988; keppler et al.
2003; shcheka et al.
2006; ni and keppler 2013) or coat grain surfaces (mathez 1987; pineau and mathez 1990; mathez and mogk 1998).
external carbon sources.
the carbon in a system experiencing fluid-mineral interaction need not be solely internally derived from the local rock host.
fluids carrying carbon from external sources may mix with an otherwise carbon-free fluid.
at least at depths above the brittle-ductile transition, meteoric waters drawn downward by hydrothermal or metamorphic circulation may carry atmosphere-derived carbon.
magmas also represent a potentially important carbon source.
carbon in volcanic gases typically occurs as co2; reduced species such as co and ch4 are very low in abundance (symonds et al.
1994; burton 2013).
pre-eruptive co2 contents of the main types of mafic magmas are 2000–7000 ppm in ocean island basalts and ~1500 ppm in normal morb (marty and tolstikhin 1998; gerlach et al.
2002; oppenheimer 2003; dasgupta 2013; ni and keppler 2013).
andesite exhibits a wide range of pre-eruptive co2, from below detection to 2500 ppm (wallace 2005), and co2 is typically below detection in silicic magmas such as dacites and rhyolites (oppenheimer 2003).
carbonatite and carbonated silicate magmas, though rare, carry substantial carbon and may act as a carbon source where they trigger production of more common magmas (dasgupta and hirschmann 2006; jones et al.
2013).
although inferred pre-eruptive carbon contents of the more common magma types are generally low, molecular carbon species are strongly partitioned into the vapor phase when magmas reach saturation.
this fractionation means that substantial carbon may be lost prior to entrapment of melt inclusions or liberation of volcanic gas, both of which form the basis for estimates of the above volatile abundances.
in many cases, concentration estimates are therefore simply lower bounds.
this factor may be particularly important in convergent margins and orogenic belts.
for example, blundy et al.
(2010) proposed early saturation of co2 and more co2-rich arc magmas than previously assumed.
the occurrence of magmatic calcite inclusions in granitoids is a test of this idea.
audétat et al.
(2004) describe magmatic calcite inclusions in quartz and apatite in a quartz monzodioritic dike at santa rita, new mexico.
calcite on the liquidus in granitic systems requires crystallization at depths of at least 10 km (swanson 1979; audétat et al.
2004), at conditions of high co2 partial pressure.
the santa rita example suggests that, at least locally, very high carbon contents may in fact occur in felsic systems.
rare carbonate-bearing scapolite that is rich in meionite component [ca4al6si6o24(co3)] has been reported from a range of volcanic and plutonic rock types (goff et al.
1982; mittwede 1994; smith et al.
2008).
carbon contents may also be particularly high in alkaline and peralkaline magmatic systems due to elevated carbonate solubility (koster van groos and wyllie 1968).
alkali carbonate/bicarbonate-rich fluids have been reported from numerous granitic pegmatites (anderson et al.
2001; sirbescu and nabelek 2003a, b; thomas et al.
2006, 2011).
evidence is chiefly the presence of fluid and melt inclusions containing carbonate daughter minerals such as nahcolite (na2co3), zabuyelite (li2co3), and even potassium carbonate (k2co3).
in a detailed study, thomas et al.
(2011) report evidence for pegmatite emplacement from a three-phase fluid system of hydrous carbonate melt, a hydrous carbonate-saturated silicate melt, and co2-rich vapor.
total carbonate species concentrations in the vapor phase may exceed 30–40 wt%.
these observations demonstrate that magmatic systems represent an important, though highly variable, source of carbon in the geologic environment through which they pass.
finally, mantle degassing may provide an important source of carbon (burton 2013; dasgupta 2013).
evidence for mantle fluids in deep environments is typically obscured by more voluminous fluids sourced from crustal rocks.
however, fluid inclusions in mantle xenoliths record evidence for reduced carbon species, including ch4, co, and, potentially, cos (melton et al.
1972; melton and giardini 1974; murck et al.
1978; bergman and dubessy 1984; tomilenko et al.
1998).
in addition, carbonate-metasomatized shear zones of the deep crust display mantle-like c, sr, and he isotope ratios, leading to the inference that components of the fluids that deposited the carbonates were initially of mantle origin (baratov et al.
1984; lapin et al.
1987; stern and gwinn 1990; dahlgren et al.
1993; dunai and touret 1993; oliver et al.
1993; wickham et al.
1994).
oxidized carbon in aqueous fluids at high p and t
a vast body of experimental and theoretical work has shown that in pure h2o at ambient conditions and along the liquid-vapor saturation curve, species of oxidized carbon dissolved in pure h2o include carbonate ion (co3-2), bicarbonate ion (hco3-), and dissolved co2 (co2aq; fig.
1).
a fourth possible species, “true” carbonic acid (h2co3; fig.
1), has been isolated as a pure gas and solid (e.g., terlouw et al.
1987), but decomposes rapidly in h2o, such that the reaction
h2co3 = co2aq + h2o	(1)
proceeds far to the right; for example, at room t and p, h2co3 concentration is about ~0.1% of co2aq (loerting et al.
2000; ludwig and kornath 2000; tossell 2006; england et al.
2011).
detection of these low concentrations of h2co3 in aqueous solutions has now been convincingly achieved (falcke and eberle 1990; soli and byrne 2002; adamczyk et al.
2009).
nevertheless, because of its very low concentration, geochemists conventionally treat the carbon present in both hydrated neutral species as co2aq.
the predominant oxidized carbon species interact via two stepwise dissociation reactions.
the first involves generation of bicarbonate from co2aq and a solvent h2o molecule:
co2aq + h2o = hco3- + h+	(2)
the second stepwise dissociation reaction is
hco3- = co3-2 + h+	(3)
figure 2a shows that at ambient conditions, neutral ph of h2o lies between pk2 and pk3, where pki is the negative logarithm of the equilibrium constant k of reaction i.
thus, bicarbonate will often be the predominant species when ph is fixed independently of the carbon system.
natural crustal and mantle solutions are complex, and contain substantial dissolved metal cations.
these may interact with carbonate ions to form ion pairs such as naco3-, caco3°, or cahco3+.
but dissolved oxidized carbon chemistry will vary strongly with geologic environment even in dilute aqueous solutions, because the pk values and the equilibrium constant for h2o dissociation are strong functions of p and t. thus, as illustrated in figure 2b, the predominant species can be expected to change in deep crustal and mantle settings.
aqueous fluids at high p and t
experimental constraints on homogeneous systems.
whereas there is a voluminous literature on aqueous carbonate ion speciation at ambient conditions and along the liquid-vapor saturation curve of h2o, there have been few direct studies of homogenous aqueous carbonate systems at high p and t. this lack is chiefly due to the experimental challenges posed by working at these conditions.
read (1975) appears to have been the first experimentalist to examine aqueous carbonate equilibria at pressures greater than a few hundred atmospheres.
extending earlier work by ellis (1959a) and ryzhenko (1963), he used electrical conductivity measurements to 250 °c and 0.2 gpa (= 2 kbar) to determine the equilibrium constant for reaction (2):
(4)
the results revealed that k rises with increasing p at constant t, but drops with increasing t at constant p. thus, reaction (2) is driven to the right on isothermal compression, but to the left on isobaric heating.
kruse and franck (1982) compressed khco3 solutions at up to 300 °c and 0.050 gpa, and used raman spectroscopy to show that co3-2 is favored relative to hco3-.
frantz (1998) used a similar approach on 1 molal k2co3 and khco3 solutions.
he studied solutions along two isobars of 0.1 and 0.2 gpa, to 550 °c.
when adjusted for raman scattering cross-section ratios, the results support isobaric decreases in hco3- relative to co2aq and co3-2 (fig.
3).
martinez et al.
(2004) studied 0.5 and 2 m k2co3 solutions in a diamond cell.
raman spectra in runs to 400 °c and 0.03 gpa indicated the presence of co3-2, but not hco3-.
they inferred that hco3- stability decreases significantly at high pressure.
thus, it appears that bicarbonate ion becomes less stable relative to co2aq and carbonate as p and t rise to crustal and mantle conditions.
none of the spectroscopic studies yielded evidence for metal-carbonate ion pairing, although the solutions were relatively dilute.
in addition, no evidence has been found for carbonic acid, consistent with results at ambient conditions (e.g., davis and oliver 1972); however, falcke and eberle (1990) found evidence of h2co3 at high ionic strengths.
the significantly higher ionic strengths of high p–t solutions (manning 2004) means that this species may yet be found at these conditions.
finally, there is not yet any evidence of other species in high p–t aqueous solutions.
for example, it has been suggested that dicarbonate ion (c2o5-2) may be produced by reaction of carbonate ion with h2o:
2co3-2 + h2o = c2o5-2 + 2oh-	(5)
(zeller et al.
2005).
although dicarbonate ions may form when co2 dissolves into carbonate melts via
co2 + co3-2 = c2o5-2	(6)
(claes et al.
1996), there is as yet no evidence for this species in relevant geological fluids at crustal or mantle conditions.
experimental studies of carbonate mineral solubility in h2o.
the most voluminous source of information on oxidized carbon species in aqueous solutions comes from studies of the solubility of carbonate minerals in h2o and mixed solvents.
in general, experimental work has focused on the solubility of divalent metal carbonates, chiefly calcite, because carbonate minerals involving monovalent or trivalent cations are highly soluble or require extremely acidic ph, respectively (rimstidt 1997).
the solubility of carbonate minerals in h2o is strongly dependent on ph, regardless of p and t (fig.
4).
however, when carbonate minerals dissolve in initially pure h2o, the solute products shift ph to a value that is more alkaline than neutral ph at the conditions of interest.
hence, all carbonate minerals contribute alkalinity to crustal and mantle fluids.
we focus first on calcite in h2o, then other minerals in h2o, then carbonate minerals in more complex solutions.
numerous studies investigated calcite solubility in h2o (co2-free or equilibrated with earth’s atmosphere) at low p and t along the h2o liquid-vapor saturation curve and up to ~0.1 gpa (wells 1915; frear 1929; schloemer 1952; morey 1962; segnit 1962; plummer 1982).
the results showed that calcite dissolution in pure h2o is congruent, and that solubility decreases with increasing temperature isobarically and along the h2o boiling curve—the well-known “reverse solubility” effect for calcite.
there are only 3 studies of calcite solubility in h2o at higher p and t appropriate for metamorphism and mantle fluids (fig.
5).
walther and long (1986) reported initial results at 0.1–0.3 gpa, 300–600 °c.
they observed that solubility decreased with increasing temperature at 0.1–0.2 gpa; however at 0.3 gpa solubility was constant or increased slightly with temperature.
fein and walther (1989) later showed that the solubilities of walther and long (1986) were too low because they used less accurate post-experiment analytical procedures.
however, the revised results yield similar solubility trends at 0.2 gpa (fig.
5).
caciagli and manning (2003) extended these studies to deep crustal and mantle pressures (fig.
5).
their data confirm that at high pressure calcite exhibits an isobaric rise in solubility with temperature.
calcite transforms to aragonite at high pressure (boettcher 1968; johannes 1971); no studies have yet investigated aragonite solubility directly, though caciagli and manning (2003) extrapolated their results into the aragonite stability field.
lennie (2005) found that, at ambient t, ikaite (caco3•6h2o) was stable with respect to calcite + h2o; however, solubility data were not obtained.
although solubilities of a wide range of metal carbonate minerals in h2o have been investigated at low pressures and temperatures (below 0.1 gpa), high-pressure studies are rare.
sanchez-valle et al.
(2003) combined hydrothermal diamond anvil cell (hdac) methods with synchrotron x-ray fluorescence to determine srco3 solubility in h2o to 3.6 gpa and 525 °c.
strontianite was used because a high atomic number was required to obtain sufficiently favorable detection limits.
heating/compression runs in the hdac revealed that strontianite solubility increases with pressure and temperature.
maximum solubility at 3.3–3.6 gpa and 475–525 °c was ~0.2 mol/kg h2o.
siderite (feco3) dissolution in h2o has been studied to 400 °c 1.13 gpa in the hdac (marocchi et al.
2011), but the acquired raman spectra were not used to determine quantitative solubility values.
the paucity of data on the dissolution of simple carbonate minerals in pure h2o at the high pressures presents serious challenges for testing thermodynamic models of carbonate ions and mineral solubility (see below).
however, the hydrothermal piston–cylinder methods (e.g., caciagli and manning 2003) in parallel with hydrothermal diamond anvil cell methods (sanchez-valle et al.
2003) hold promise for generating such data in the near future.
experimental studies of calcite solubility in nacl–h2o.
studies at p < 0.1 gpa show that calcite solubility in h2o increases with addition of nacl (ellis 1963; malinin 1972).
fein and walther (1989) extended these studies to higher pressure of 0.2 gpa and temperature up to 600 °c.
they showed that with addition of up to 0.1 m nacl, calcite solubility increased consistent with formation of cacl+ in solution (fig.
6).
newton and manning (2002a) conducted experiments on calcite solubility in h2o–nacl at 600–900 °c, 1.0 gpa, and to highly concentrated nacl solutions approaching halite saturation.
they showed that calcite solubility increased with nacl at all investigated conditions (fig.
7).
the pressure, temperature, and composition dependence of calcite molality (mcaco3) are described by
(7)
with p in kbar (1 kbar = 0.1 gpa) and t in kelvins.
the solubility increase with temperature and salinity is so great that critical mixing of nacl-rich hydrous carbonate liquid and caco3-rich saline solution was proposed at 1.0 gpa at about 1000 °c and nacl mole fraction (xnacl) of ~0.4.
the enhancement of solubility increases dramatically with temperature at constant xnacl.
experiments at 0.6, 1.0, and 1.4 gpa revealed a slight increase with pressure (~20%) at fixed xnacl.
moreover, newton and manning’s solubility data display a simple dependence on the square of the nacl mole fraction.
this result has important implications for the nature of carbon and other solutes.
an increase in solubility over the entire investigated range shows that the solute species are not hydrous; if they were, their concentrations would be required to decline with rising nacl in concert with decreasing h2o activity.
these concentrated solutions behave in a manner similar to molten salts (newton and manning 2002a, 2005; tropper and manning 2007), in which the activity of nacl is proportional to the square of its mole fraction (aranovich and newton 1996), and solute mixing is nearly ideal.
this result led to the inference that the dissolution reaction, written in terms of predominant species, was
caco3 + nacl = cacl+ + naco3-	(8)
calcite
further discussion of the chemistry of saline brines can be found in newton and manning (2010).
experimental studies of calcite solubility in co2–h2o.
miller (1952), ellis (1959b), sharp and kennedy (1965), and malinin and kanukov (1972) showed that, at low fixed p and t, calcite solubility in h2o increases to a maximum and then declines with increasing xco2.
fein and walther (1987) extended these studies to 0.2 gpa, 550 °c, and found similar behavior.
at 0.2 gpa, calcite solubility reaches a maximum at xco2 = 0.025 to 0.05 and then decreases (fig.
8).
fein and walther suggested that this solubility behavior arises from the tradeoff between increasing formation of bicarbonate and decreasing h2o activity as xco2 was increased.
thermodynamics of oxidized carbon in dilute aqueous systems.
two fundamentally different approaches to treat oxidized dissolved carbon species have evolved in the literature, depending on the application.
the first approach, which could be termed a component approach, is commonly used for the treatment of metamorphic fluids and fluids in the mantle (anderson and crerar 1993; zhang and duan 2009).
it treats co2 as a component for which the partial molal gibbs free energy () is expressed by
(9)
where the first term on the right-hand side represents the standard partial molal gibbs energy of co2      ().
the standard state is the hypothetical ideal gas at the temperature of interest and 1 atmosphere.
the second term on the right-hand side represents the connection from the standard state to the real fluid.
in this term,  represents the fugacity coefficient,  the mole fraction and  the partial pressure of co2, all at the pressure and temperature of interest.
this approach ignores the detailed speciation of the dissolved carbon dioxide.
there is no concept of ph in the model.
advantages of this approach are that the first term on the right-hand side of equation (9) can be easily calculated from experimental data and statistical mechanics, and that it permits consideration of the full compositional range along the co2–h2o binary (see below).
most of the labor involved in this approach is associated with evaluating the second term on the right-hand side.
specifically, very intensive experimental and theoretical efforts are needed to derive the fugacity coefficients for pure fluids and mixtures of fluids (jacobs and kerrick 1981b; kerrick and jacobs 1981; holland and powell 1991; zhang et al.
2007; zhang and duan 2009).
without any experimental data it is difficult to implement this approach.
the second approach could be called the speciation approach, commonly used in the aqueous geochemistry of hydrothermal fluids.
here, all known dissolved carbon species are treated explicitly and the dependence on ph and concentrations of other components can be evaluated.
for example, for the dissolved carbonate ion, we treat the partial molal gibbs free energy of formation of the ion                    () by defining
(10)
where  represents the standard partial molal free energy of formation at reference pressure and temperature, and  and  represent the activity coefficient and molality, respectively, of the aqueous carbonate ion.
here the standard state is the hypothetical 1.0 m solution referenced to infinite dilution at the temperature and pressure of interest.
the advantage of this approach is that ions are treated explicitly, enabling ph variations to be analyzed as a result of interactions with silicate mineral assemblages that control activity ratios such as  a_(〖ca〗^(2+) )⁄(a_(h^+)^2 ).
disadvantages of this approach are that only species whose existence is known can be included in the model, and its applicability is limited to h2o-rich solutions and conditions where h2o solvent properties are well known.
the most difficult and uncertain aspect of evaluating equation (10) is the calculation of the first term on the right-hand side: the standard gibbs free energy of formation of the ion.
considerable effort has been expended in developing methods to calculate this term for many types of aqueous species including metal complexes and biomolecules (shock and helgeson 1988, 1990; shock et al.
1989, 1997a, 1997b; shock 1995; amend and helgeson 1997; sverjensky et al.
1997; plyasunov and shock 2001; richard 2001; dick et al.
2006).
in contrast, the second term on the right-hand side can be approximated, at least for water-rich fluids, by the extended debye–hückel equation (helgeson et al.
1981), which can be used to evaluate the aqueous ion activity coefficients.
experimental and theoretical studies relevant to these two approaches are summarized below.
as an example of the species approach we focus on the aqueous co3-2 ion.
the standard gibbs free energy of formation of the ion at elevated pressure and temperature can be calculated from
(11)
where  again represents the free energy at the reference pressure and temperature (shock et al.
1997b).
the function f(p,t) is a complex function of equation-of-state coefficients of the carbonate ion associated with the non-solvation part of the gibbs free energy change, and  represents the equation-of-state coefficient for the carbonate ion associated with the solvation part of the gibbs free energy change, which also depends on the dielectric constant of pure water ().
equation-of-state coefficients have been developed for hundreds of aqueous species and are part of the data file for the program supcrt92 (johnson et al.
1992).
equation (11) emphasizes that the dielectric constant at pressure and temperature is a critical parameter for evaluating the standard gibbs energies of aqueous species at high pressures and temperatures.
however, extensive sets of experimental values of  have only been measured to about 0.5 gpa and 550 °c (heger et al.
1980).
a synthesis of these values together with estimates from the kirkwood equation (pitzer 1983) is incorporated in supcrt92 which enables prediction to 0.5 gpa and 1000 °c (shock et al.
1992).
a more recent synthesis, also based on the kirkwood equation has been extrapolated to 1.0 gpa and 1,200 k (fernandez et al.
1997).
the limitation of supcrt92 calculations to 0.5 gpa has long been a severe roadblock to the application of quantitative aqueous geochemistry to deep crustal and mantle conditions.
methods for making calculations at higher pressures up to 3.0 gpa are summarized below.
much progress has been made in recent years by extrapolating experimental solubilities and individual equilibrium constants to pressures substantially greater than the 0.5 gpa limitation of supcrt92 (manning 1994, 1998, 2004; caciagli 2003; dolejs and manning 2010).
empirical extrapolations can be carried out by taking advantage of the approximate linearity of many equilibrium constants when plotted in terms of the logk versus the logh2o at a given temperature, where h2o is the density of water.
an example for the solubility product of calcite is shown in figure 9.
extrapolation of equilibrium constants as in figure 9, together with other aqueous phase equilibria involving dissolved oxidized carbon species enables prediction of solubility and aqueous speciation involving aqueous ions at elevated pressure and temperature without using equations (10) and (11).
evaluation of the aqueous ion activity coefficients in equation (10) at pressures and temperatures to 0.5 gpa and 550 °c is carried out using the extended debye–hückel equation for nacl-bearing fluids (helgeson et al., 1981).
for example, the activity coefficient of the carbonate ion is calculated according to
(12)
where z refers to the charge on the carbonate ion (-2), and refer to debye–hückel coefficients that are properties of pure water (helgeson and kirkham 1974a, b);  refers to the ion-size parameter for nacl solutions, i refers to the ionic strength, and  represents the extended term parameter for nacl solutions.
using smoothed values of the dielectric constant from helgeson and kirkham (1974a), franck et al.
(1990), and fernandez et al.
(1997), it is possible to obtain estimates of  and (fig.
10).
values of the extended term parameter  are subject to substantial uncertainty at elevated pressures and temperatures, but can be estimated from correlation with the density of water to give the preliminary shown in figure 11.
taken together, equilibrium constants such as those shown in figure 10 and debye–hückel parameters such as those shown in figures 10 and 11 can be used to estimate the solubilities of carbonate minerals in water.
as an example, the solubility of calcite is shown in figure 12 at 500 °c as a function of pressure.
the predicted solubility of calcite can be compared with a variety of published experimental studies (walther 1986; fein 1989; caciagli 2003).
it can be seen that the predicted curve agrees well with the data from fein and walther (1989), but is higher than the data from walther and long (1986), and is in agreement with the lowest solubilities reported by caciagli and manning (2003).
the steep increase in solubility between 0.1 and 0.5 gpa noted by caciagli and manning (2003) tapers off to a much slower rate of increase with pressure approaching 3.0 gpa at 500 °c.
in this range of pressures, the predominant reaction controlling the solubility of calcite is given by
caco3 + h2o = ca+2 + 2oh- + co2aq	(13)
calcite
the calculated ph values vary from 7.8 at 0.1 gpa to 5.4 at 3.0 gpa, yet less than 5% of the dissolved carbon is present as hco3- and co3-2 in the fluids.
it should be emphasized that the theoretical curve shown in figure 12 is completely predicted based on the established standard gibbs free energy of formation of calcite (berman 1988), the estimated equilibrium constants for
h2o = h+ + oh-	(14)
and reactions (2), (3), and (13), extrapolated to elevated pressures as described above with the density model and the estimated aqueous ion activity coefficients discussed above.
as noted above, the extrapolations for the logk values were based on supcrt92 predictions to 0.5 gpa using published equations of state for aqueous co2, hco3-, and co3-2 (shock et al.
1989, 1997).
however, the density extrapolation for the water dissociation reaction (eqn.
13) was based on an independent summary of experimental values (marshall and franck 1981).
co2–h2o mixing and miscibility
above a temperature of about 350 °c and pressures higher than the h2o liquid–vapor saturation curve, h2o and co2 are fully miscible (fig.
13).
full miscibility therefore occurs at most conditions relevant for studies of the deep carbon cycle—much of the crust and all of the mantle—and fluids may be much richer in oxidized carbon than in the more “dilute” systems discussed above.
however, complexities arise in fluids with additional components.
while there is a substantial literature devoted to the thermodynamic behavior of the binary co2–h2o system, much remains to be done to improve our understanding of more compositionally relevant fluids expected in deep environments.
experimental and theoretical constraints on the co2–h2o binary.
the mixing of co2 and h2o is highly nonideal (eqn.
9), so considerable effort has been dedicated to generating experimental and theoretical constraints for use in petrology.
experimental studies take two approaches.
a variety of approaches has been used to obtain direct measurement of volumes of mixing in homogeneous co2–h2o fluids (todheide and franck 1963; takenouchi and kennedy 1964; sterner and bodnar 1991; seitz and blencoe 1999).
experimental challenges generally limit these studies to low pressure.
studies utilizing fluid inclusions hold promise for extending pvt measurements to higher pressures (e.g., sterner and bodnar 1991; frost and wood 1997).
an alternative is study of displacement of mineral equilibria as a function of fluid composition in mixed volatile systems.
building on pioneering work by greenwood, metz, skippen, and co-workers (e.g., greenwood 1967; metz and trommsdorff 1968; skippen 1971), a number of investigators have provided high-pressure constraints on the mixing properties of the co2–h2o binary (eggert and kerrick 1981; jacobs and kerrick 1981a; aranovich and newton 1999).
theoretical approaches also offer promise (brodholt and wood 1993; destrigneville et al.
1996).
the experimental data and theoretical results serve as constraints for equations of state of co2–h2o fluid mixtures.
the literature on this topic is so large that even its review papers are too numerous to list completely.
useful compilations, contributions and critiques can be found in ferry and baumgartner (1987), duan et al.
(1996), and gottschalk (2007).
co2–h2o–nacl and other complex fluids.
addition of nacl to co2–h2o yields an extensive region of immiscibility in the ternary system (e.g., heinrich 2007).
experimental studies in this system were reviewed by liebscher (2007).
extension of low-p experiments (gehrig et al.
1979; anovitz et al.
2004; aranovich et al.
2010) to 0.5 gpa and beyond (kotelnikov and kotelnikova 1990; johnson 1991; frantz et al.
1992; joyce and holloway 1993; gibert et al.
1998; shmulovich and graham 1999, 2004) indicates the presence of a miscibility gap between low density co2–h2o rich vapor and nacl–h2o–rich brine at a wide range of crustal and mantle p and t. experimental studies on cacl2–co2–h2o yield similar results (zhang and frantz 1989; shmulovich and graham 2004).
equations of state for ternary system have been constructed based on experiment and theory (bowers and helgeson 1983a, b; duan et al.
1995), allowing computation of simple phase equilibria involving one or two fluid phases.
figure 14a shows an example of the isothermal, isobaric ternary at 0.9 gpa and 800 °c.
a single, miscible fluid phase occurs in the h2o-rich portion of the system.
phase separation occurs at < 65 mol% h2o, yielding an nacl-rich brine and a co2-rich vapor.
at these conditions, the brine phase attains halite saturation at ~60 mol% nacl, whereas halite saturates in the vapor phase at only ~1 mol% nacl in fluids with > 72 mol% co2.
as illustrated in figure 14b, replacement of nacl by cacl2 significantly expands the miscibility gap, all else equal.
variations in the topology of the ternary system are illustrated in figure 15, which shows that the miscibility gap is expected to persist for a wide range of crustal and mantle conditions, even for low-salinity co2–h2o fluids.
newton and manning (2002) hypothesized that, in the presence of calcite, h2o–nacl fluids may coexist with a hydrous, saline caco3 liquid at 800–1000 °c, 1.0 gpa (fig.
16).
in general, extensive immiscibility in the nacl–co2–h2o ternary system has fundamental importance for carbon transport in the crust and mantle.
it requires that co2 is largely partitioned into a low-density vapor phase that may move separately from a dense, saline brine (touret 1985; skippen and trommsdorff 1986; trommsdorff and skippen 1986; newton et al.
1998; heinrich et al.
2004).
shmulovich et al.
(2006) reported experimental data and a model for quartz solubility in co2–h2o fluids containing different salts.
however, there is currently insufficient data to constrain models that include the properties of ternary fluids in this system and ionic species.
though preliminary models have been constructed (e.g., duan et al.
1995), more accurate and complete data and models are needed for treating complex reactive flow problems in crustal and mantle settings.
it is generally assumed that non-polar molecules such as co2 are poor solvents.
however, it has been hypothesized that co2-rich fluids are responsible for element metasomatism in several geologic contexts.
for example, petrologic observations of some granulites require a fluid phase with low h2o activity that is capable of dissolving and redistributing important major and trace elements.
newton et al.
(1980) argued that a silicate melt could not explain observations, and proposed a co2-rich fluid instead.
although supported by evidence from co2-rich fluid inclusions, petrologic considerations were problematic (lamb and valley 1987; yardley and valley 1997); the requirement that such a fluid was responsible for metasomatic transfer of presumed low-solubility elements such as alkalis and th poses further challenges.
similar proposals have been made for ree and other element metasomatism in mantle xenoliths (berkesi et al.
2012).
the immiscibility between brine and vapor in the h2o–co2–nacl system even at very high p and t potentially solves this conundrum (touret 1985; newton et al.
1998; newton and manning 2010).
in this hypothesis, metasomatism takes place in the presence of a two-phase fluid.
the co2-rich vapor phase has wetting properties that lead to its selective entrapment as fluid inclusions, while the brine phase is a powerful solvent responsible for observed metasomatism (gibert et al.
1998).
both phases contain co2, but partitioning between the phases differs depending on p, t, and composition.
such two-phase systems may be more important in crustal metamorphism than has previously been appreciated.
mineral solubility and solute structure in co2–h2o fluids.
the presence of co2 strongly influences mineral solubility and material transport by crustal and mantle aqueous fluids (walther and helgeson 1980).
because co2 is non-polar (fig.
1), its addition to h2o lowers the solvent dielectric constant at constant p and t (walther and schott 1988; walther 1992), indicating that dilution of h2o by co2 reduces the number of h2o molecules that solvate solutes dissolved in the fluid.
the disruption of aqueous ion hydration by co2 in high p–t fluids was studied by evans et al.
(2009) using exafs on rbbr–h2o–co2 fluids to 579 °c and 0.26 gpa.
the fluids were trapped as synthetic fluid inclusions in corundum.
in co2-free solutions, the number of nearest neighbor oxygen atoms (in hydrating h2o molecules) decreased from 6 ± 0.6 to 1.4 ± 0.1 as t increased from 20 to 534 °c, and p to ~0.3 gpa.
at xco2 = 0.08, evans et al.
(2009) infer decreases of 16 and 22% in the number of nearest-neighbor oxygen atoms at 312 and 445 °c, respectively.
this decrease suggests that co2 addition leads to decreasing extent of ion hydration.
fein and walther (1987) experimentally investigated calcite solubility in h2o–co2 fluids to 0.2 gpa and 550 °c.
they found that at constant pressure and temperature, calcite solubility initially increases with increasing xco2.
it reaches a maximum at xco2 = 0.025 to 0.05 and then decreases.
taking the calcite dissolution reaction to be
caco3 + 2h+ = ca+2 + co2aq + h2o	(15)
calcite
they inferred that the initial isothermal, isobaric solubility increase is due to reaction (2) progressing to the right.
however, h2o activity declines with increasing co2, and this decline eventually predominates, driving reaction (9) progressively to the left (decreasing solubility) with further increase in co2.
fein and walther (1987) suggested that the consequence of reduced h2o activity is diminished extent of hydration of ca+2 in solution.
similar effects lead to a decrease in quartz solubility with increasing xco2.
solute silica does not form complexes with co2, so changes in h2o activity are chiefly responsible for solubility variations with  at a given p and t. walther and orville (1983) suggested that h2o solvation of dissolved silica could be assessed by writing the quartz dissolution reaction as:
sio2 + nh2o = si(oh)4•(n-2)h2o	(16)
quartz 	solute complex
the equation includes two moles of h2o as hydroxyl and n-2 moles of molecular, solvation h2o per mole of solute silicon.
at constant p and t, the number of h2o of solvation can be determined from quartz solubility data by the relation .
early work lacked sufficient precision to derive the silica hydration state.
walther and orville (1983) concluded that, assuming all silica dissolved as monomeric si(oh)4, n ≈ 4 (i.e., two molecular h2o of solvation) for many conditions, though uncertainties in n were at least ±1.
later studies yielded n of 3.5 or 2 (shmulovich et al.
2006; akinfiev and diamond 2009), or suggested that n decreases with increasing  at constant p and t (newton and manning 2000; shmulovich et al.
2001).
improved accuracy of this approach has been attained by taking advantage of new and more precise equations of state for h2o–co2 fluids (e.g., aranovich and newton 1999) and by accounting explicitly for aqueous silica polymerization (e.g., zotov and keppler 2000, 2002; newton and manning 2002b, 2003).
newton and manning (2009) determined quartz solubility in h2o–co2 fluids at 800 °c and 1.0 gpa.
using experimentally constrained models of h2o activity and mixing of silica monomers and dimers, they determined that n = 4.0 for their experiments and all previous high-quality data at different p and t. they also obtained n = 7.0 for silica dimers.
these results indicate that, regardless of silica species, there are two solvating h2o molecules per si in h2o–co2 fluids for a large range of crustal metasomatic processes.
this result is somewhat surprising because it implies that the hydration state of aqueous silica does not change over a wide range of xco2.
evidently, over the range of xco2 studied so far, the decline in silica solubility with increasing co2 concentration means that there is always sufficient molecular h2o to supply the two h2o molecules associated with each dissolved si.
the simple model for silica solubility in mixed h2o–co2 fluids aids study of crustal mass transfer (e.g., ferry et al.
2011).
reduced carbon in aqueous fluids at high p and t
ch4 and co solubility in h2o
gas solubilities in h2o generally decrease with rising temperature, but this is only true to a certain extent along the vapor–liquid saturation (boiling) curve for h2o.
solubility minima vary among gases (shock et al.
1989; shock and mckinnon 1993; plyasunov and shock 2001).
in the case of methane, the solubility minimum occurs at about 100 °c as shown in figure 17.
it can also be seen in figure 17 that there is increasing experimental disagreement in the solubility of methane with increasing temperature, and the scatter seems to maximize at higher temperatures.
the curve in figure 17 is calculated with thermodynamic data and revised hkf equation-of-state parameters from plyasunov and shock (2001), who also used experimental high-temperature enthalpy of solution data and partial molal heat capacity data for ch4aq in their regression procedure.
note that the calculated equilibrium constant for methane dissolution is an order of magnitude less negative at 300 °c than at the solubility minimum at 100 °c, suggesting that significant amounts of methane can be lost from solution in cooling portions of hydrothermal systems.
carbon monoxide is similar in solubility to ch4, as indicated by the curves in figure 18, and both gases are considerably less soluble than co2.
note that the minimum logk for the co dissolution reaction is a little lower in temperature than that for ch4, but that both minima are at considerably lower temperatures than that for co2, which occurs at about 175 °c.
although the curves differ by about 1.5 log units at 0 °c, they tend to converge with increasing temperature and are within 0.7 log units of one another at 350 °c.
as a result, there are highly variable consequences for exsolution of gases during cooling of hydrothermal fluids.
as with co2, ch4 and co become fully miscible with h2o at t greater than about 350 °c and modest pressure (fig.
13).
thus, in most crustal and mantle contexts, binary fluids are stable as a single phase for all compositions.
numerous equations of state based on experiment and theory have been derived to describe the behavior of these fluids.
gottschalk (2007) provides a recent review of the topic.
further similarities between ch4–h2o and co2–h2o (and likely co–h2o as well) can be found in the role played by the addition of nacl.
as in the co2–h2o system discussed above, addition of nacl leads to unmixing into two fluid phases, an h2o-rich brine, and a ch4-rich vapor (fig.
19).
generally, it can be expected that the similarity in ch4–h2o and co2–h2o mixing properties should lead to very similar geochemical behavior of the molecular carbon species in aqueous solutions.
for example, it can be anticipated that the effect of ch4 on quartz solubility is similar to that of co2 as described by newton and manning (2009), all else equal.
kinetic inhibition of ch4 formation
in many crustal fluids, coexisting co2 and ch4 are not in equilibrium with each other (e.g., janecky and seyfried 1986; shock 1988, 1990; charlou et al.
1998, 2000; mccollom and seewald 2001).
disequilibrium is most pronounced at temperatures below about 500 °c (shock 1990, 1992), which are relevant to low-grade metamorphism, hydrothermal systems, sedimentary basins, and subduction zones.
the underlying reasons for this disequilibrium state lie in the difficulty of breaking bonds and transferring the eight electrons required for co2 and ch4 to react reversibly.
consequently, stable equilibrium between co2 and ch4 is in many cases attained only at high p and t. in many hydrothermal systems, and throughout sedimentary basins, ch4 is so slow to form that it persists in concentrations that are far from equilibrium with redox conditions determined by coexisting mineral assemblages.
as shown in figure 20, the kinetic inhibition of co2–ch4 equilibration produces a “window of opportunity” for metastable persistence of wide array of aqueous organic compounds at conditions where c–o–h fluids would otherwise consist almost entirely of co2, ch4, h2o, and h2.
although organic compounds are less stable than co2 or ch4 depending on the prevailing oxidation–reduction conditions, the sluggish kinetics allows them to persist within this window for millions to billions of years.
this metastability is why petroleum, coal, kerogen, bitumen, and other forms of organic matter persevere in sedimentary and low-grade metamorphic rocks, and why organic compounds are often encountered in hydrothermal systems.
slow reaction rates also help explain why there are organic compounds present in carbonaceous meteorites billions of years after their formation through complex processes in the condensing solar nebula and on the parent bodies of the meteorites.
in fact, metastable organic compounds are relatively abundant throughout the solar system, especially in the outer reaches populated by icy satellites and comets, which appear to have extensive inventories of organic compounds.
even though organic compounds persist in metastable states, they continue to react in response to thermodynamic driving forces.
in many cases, reactions among organic compounds reach metastable equilibrium states, in which the organic compounds attain ratios consistent with equilibrium constants for reactions written among them.
these metastable states were first recognized in data from natural systems (shock 1988, 1989, 1994; helgeson et al.
1993), which led to experimental tests first with hydrocarbons (seewald 1994) and then with organic acids, alcohols, and ketones (seewald 2001; mccollom and seewald 2003a, b; see mccollom 2013).
recently it was shown that many conversions between alkanes and alkenes, alkenes and alcohols, and alcohols and ketones are reversible reactions at temperatures and pressures of upper-crustal hydrothermal systems (yang et al.
2012; shipp et al.
in press).
abundances of organic compounds in sedimentary basins suggest that, in some cases, metastable equilibrium states also include co2 (shock 1988, 1989, 1994; helgeson et al.
1993), leading to the hypothesis that abiotic organic synthesis in hydrothermal systems proceeds from co2 to organic compounds (shock 1990, 1992; shock and schulte 1998; mccollom and seewald 2007; shock and canovas 2010; mccollom 2013).
reduced carbon and aqueous fluids at high p and t
burial metamorphism of organic compounds.
resilient compounds derived from plants (lignin) and microbes (long-chain carboxylic acids) progressively transform on burial.
because of the slow pace of methane formation, organic acids and other dissolved components that might not otherwise persist are added to coexisting fluid (and gas if present).
there are many pathways for these transformations, and a host of products.
oxidation of organic carbon and decarboxylation of preexisting carboxyl groups in organic matter yield co2.
small organic acids are released during petroleum and coal formation (followed, perhaps, by their decarboxylation).
hydrolytic disproportionation processes transform hydrocarbons.
alkanes, alkenes, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, and other compounds are generated through aqueous organic transformation reactions.
finally, methane and other small organic compounds are released during the conversion of lignin to coal.
while much attention has been focused on these transformations in the context of the origin and evolution of coal and petroleum deposits, the same processes operate on even small concentrations of organic matter that are insufficient to generate large deposits.
significantly, it is only in the last few decades that h2o has been recognized as a reactant or product involved in many of these organic transformations.
this view challenges the traditional assumption that water is a passive participant in the physical movement of organic compounds in sedimentary basins (hoering 1984; shock 1988, 1989, 1994; helgeson et al.
1993, 2009; lewan 1997; lewan and ruble 2002; lewan and roy 2011; reeves et al.
2012).
lignin, which makes up the structural parts of plants like wood, has evolved to be resistant to attack.
the biosynthesis of lignin by plants starts with three aromatic alcohol building blocks (monolignols) that are derived from phenylalanine (see structures in fig.
21).
biosynthetic processes in plant cells generate polymers of these alcohols through processes that are slowly being revealed (davin and lewis 2005).
in the polymerization process, the overall stoichiometry of lignin structures largely reflects that of the monolignols, with only slight modifications.
as a consequence, the model lignin molecules shown in figure 21 plot near the locations of the monolignols in the c–h–o ternary diagram shown in figure 22.
taken together, the open symbols in figure 22 represent the plant material available for incorporation into sedimentary basins.
in the case of lignin, burial in sedimentary basins leads to the generation of the low-rank coal lignite.
plotting compositions of lignin and lignite coal in figure 22 reveals that the transformation of lignin to lignite is accompanied by a decrease in the relative abundance of hydrogen.
the most direct pathway for hydrogen loss is by the liberation of methane.
note that a vector drawn from the location where methane plots in the diagram connects the compositions of buried plant material with those of lignite 1, the lowest ranking coal composition.
where it occurs, removal of methane from lignin pushes the residual solid composition toward lignite.
reference to figure 21 shows that numerous methoxy (
och3) groups are present in models for lignin, suggesting that methanol might also be a product of coal formation.
the vector extending from methanol shows that lignin would evolve toward the composition of bituminous coal.
any combination of methane and methanol production during lignin transformation drives the residual solid material into the compositional range bounded by the arrowheads of the two solid vectors (fig.
22).
the methane and methanol produced will be dissolved in aqueous fluids that coexist with this organic transformation process, and some of the methane can also exist as natural gas.
higher coal ranks—bituminous coal and anthracite—plot near the carbon apex of the ternary diagram shown in figure 22.
the transformation of lignite into these higher ranks of coal requires the removal of oxygen, which can occur in several ways, some more likely than others.
one is the release of o2; however, this process seems unlikely in highly reduced sedimentary basins, because if o2 were released it would likely react immediately with reduced constituents in the system (e.g., reduced forms of s, fe, n, or c).
effective ways to remove oxygen during elevation of coal rank are the production of co2 and/or h2o, shown by dashed vectors in figure 22.
in the case of dehydration, numerous hydroxyl groups are candidates for this process (fig.
21); however, acetic acid lies on this same vector, making it difficult to resolve the effects of dehydration from those resulting from acetic acid production.
fluids associated with some coal deposits are enriched in acetic and other small organic acids (fisher and boles 1990).
in summary, the transformation reactions leading to coal accompany the alteration of lignin in any sedimentary rock.
they lead to the release of methanol, acetic acid, other small organic solutes, and methane to sedimentary basin fluids.
major resilient constituents of microbial membranes are long-chain carboxylic acids.
it is widely thought that during the organic transformations that accompany burial and heating of sediments, these acids undergo decarboxylation.
when a carboxyl group is cleaved from the rest of the molecule, co2 and long-chain alkanes are generated (cooper and bray 1963; jurg and eisma 1964; robinson 1966; kvenvolden and weiser 1967; smith 1967; shimoyama and johns 1971, 1972; philippi 1974; snape et al.
1981; kissin 1987; hunt et al.
2002).
tie lines in figure 23 show how several carboxylic acids (indicated by carbon numbers) can decarboxylate into co2 and an alkane.
as examples, acetic acid (2 in fig.
23) produces co2 and methane via
ch3cooh ⇒ ch4 + co2	(17)
and hexadecanoic acid (16 in fig.
23) would yield co2 and pentadecane via
c15h31cooh ⇒  c15h32 + co2	(18)
the products of decarboxylation reactions lie along the c–o and c–h binaries of the ternary diagram in figure 23.
this geometry emphasizes that decarboxylation is a disproportionation reaction, because in each case the products are one compound with bulk carbon oxidation state that is more oxidized (co2) and one with carbon that is more reduced (an alkane) than in the reacting acid.
the production of hydrocarbons and co2 by acid decarboxylation is advantageous to the geochemist, because organic acids are far more soluble in water than are hydrocarbons, and it is easier to model the chemistry and transport of aqueous acids as hydrocarbon precursors than it is to model the hydrocarbons themselves.
recognition of this situation led researchers to investigate the rates of carboxylic acid decarboxylation.
initial results showed highly variable rates depending on the composition of the experimental container used (kharaka et al.
1983; palmer and drummond 1986).
palmer and drummond (1987) determined that the least catalytic surface to use is gold, and that has been the standard for subsequent work.
early studies focused on acetic acid, which is among the most abundant organic acids found in oilfield brines and other deep fluids; rates were determined by quantifying its decreasing concentration (kharaka et al.
1983).
subsequently, researchers attempted to show mass balance in their experiments, with the hope of demonstrating equal concentrations of methane and co2 generated by the decarboxylation reaction (eqn.
17).
in some cases it could be argued that roughly similar abundances of methane and co2 were produced, giving some confidence that decarboxylation rates could be established (palmer and drummond 1986; bell and palmer 1994; bell et al.
1994).
however, the composition of the experimental solution, the presence of minerals, and the presence or absence of a gas headspace in the experiments also allowed processes other than decarboxylation to occur.
these variables were explored in detail by mccollom and seewald (2003b, a), who used mineral assemblages to control the oxidation state of their experiments, and maintained careful control of mass balance.
when put to the test, the elegant simplicity of decarboxylation runs into difficulties in explaining the fate of organic acids in geologic fluids.
as revealed by analysis of natural samples and laboratory experiments, the transformations undergone by aqueous organic compounds are more complicated.
mccollom and seewald (2003b) showed, for example, that the decarboxylation reaction could explain the fate of acetic acid in the presence of the assemblage pyrite + pyrrhotite + magnetite at 325 °c and 35 mpa, but that at the same conditions, the mineral assemblages hematite + magnetite or hematite + magnetite + pyrite drove the oxidation of carbon in acetic acid, probably via the overall reaction
ch3cooh + 2h2o ⇒ 2co2 + 4h2	(19)
mccollom and seewald (2003b) also showed that, at the same conditions and in the presence of the same mineral assemblages, valeric acid (c4h9cooh) transformed by a variety of reaction pathways.
one such pathway was the degradation of valeric acid to formic acid and butene (c4h8) in the presence of hematite + magnetite, implying an overall reaction such as
c4h9cooh ⇒ c4h8 + hcooh	(20)
at the high p and t of these experiments, formic acid rapidly converts to co2 and h2 (mccollom and seewald 2001, 2003a; seewald et al.
2006) via
hcooh ⇒ co2 + h2	(21)
at more reduced conditions consistent with the pyrite + pyrrhotite + magnetite assemblage, mccollom and seewald (2003b) showed that butene would be rapidly reduced to butane (c4h10), via
c4h8 + h2 ⇒ c4h10	(22)
which, together with the conversion of formic acid to co2 (eqn.
21), would produce the misleading appearance of direct decarboxylation.
as indicated by these reactions and reference to figure 23, the generation of formic acid is not colinear with a carboxylic acid reactant and the alkane product containing one less carbon.
as an example, a line connecting pentane (c5h12) and formic acid (hcooh) would not pass through hexanoic acid (c5h11cooh; 6 in fig.
23).
instead, hexanoic acid plots above this line, implying that the addition of h2 is required in the overall reaction, which is indeed the case as given by
c5h11cooh + h2 ⇒ c5h12 + hcooh	(23)
if formic acid breakdown followed equation (21), then h2 would be consumed and produced in the overall process, again giving the misleading impression of direct decarboxylation.
in principle, during transformation of membrane biomolecules it would also be possible for other c–c bonds to be broken, allowing the formation of acetic, propanoic or other small carboxylic acids together with correspondingly shorter alkanes.
the extent of decarboxylation, deformylation, and other reactions could then determine the fates of these acids, which tend to accumulate in oil-field brines and other aqueous fluids co-produced with petroleum (shock 1988, 1989, 1994; helgeson et al.
1993; seewald 2001, 2003).
the mechanisms of decarboxylation reactions at the molecular level are currently under investigation (glein and shock, unpublished data).
reduced carbon in aqueous fluids at greater depths.
graphite is the dominant crystalline form of reduced carbon at conditions of the middle and lower crust and upper mantle.
it may be produced by a variety of pathways, such as metamorphism of organic matter, reduction of carbonate minerals, partial melting, or infiltration of externally derived carbon-bearing fluids (nokleberg 1973; andreae 1974; perry and ahmad 1977; rumble et al.
1977; wada et al.
1994; luque et al.
1998).
the composition of fluids coexisting with graphite-bearing rocks varies strongly with p, t, fluid composition, and oxygen fugacity (french 1966; ohmoto and kerrick 1977; huizenga 2001, 2011; huizenga and touret 2012).
a simple way to explore variations in graphite solubility is to track variations in the graphite saturation surface in the c–o–h ternary system (fig.
24).
each ternary diagram in figure 24 is constructed at a fixed p and t, but fo2 varies with composition within the plot.
the carbon content in a graphite-saturated fluid corresponds to the curve passing from the c–o binary to the c–h binary.
figure 24 illustrates that graphite-saturated fluid composition is variable at fixed p and t: graphite solubility is lower in ch4-rich fluid than in co2-rich fluid, and minimum graphite solubilities occur in initially pure h2o.
comparison of the ternaries also confirms that graphite solubility varies with p and t. an important conclusion to be drawn from the ternary diagrams is that, at many conditions, the solubility of graphite, nominally a refractory phase, can be surprisingly high.
in general, devolatilization of graphite-bearing rocks will produce dissolved, reduced carbon at a concentration limited by the solubility of graphite at the ambient fo2.
the relative abundance of carbon and its distribution among dominant carbon-bearing molecular components such as ch4, co2, and cos species, will vary strongly with p and t. for example, in the presence of graphite at relatively reducing conditions, a c–o–h–s fluid coexisting with the model mineral assemblage biotite + k-feldspar + pyrite + pyrrhotite will have total carbon concentration and species abundances that are strong functions of t at constant p (fig.
25; ferry and baumgartner, 1987).
carbon concentrations are higher at oxidizing conditions, with virtually all carbon is present as co2.
where reducing conditions prevail in the lower crust and upper mantle, the predominant dissolved form of carbon is generally ch4.
this conclusion is supported by fluid inclusions containing ch4 from regional metamorphic terranes (e.g., sisson and hollister 1990; huff and nabelek 2007).
interestingly, ch4 appears to be quite common as a solute in subduction-zone settings (zheng et al.
2000, 2003; fu et al.
2001, 2002, 2003a, b; shi et al.
2005).
numerous studies have shown that ch4 (and hydrocarbons) can form at high pressures and temperatures (kenney et al.
2002; kutcherov et al.
2002; scott et al.
2004; kolesnikov et al.
2009; sharma et al.
2009; marocchi et al.
2011).
but in many settings where ch4 is recorded as a component of metamorphic fluids, the temperature of entrapment does not exceed 500 °c, which raises the question of why it has formed despite the kinetic inhibition of methane formation at these temperatures.
rates of abiogenic methanogenesis may be increased by catalysis involving mineral surfaces in the host rock.
much geochemical research on heterogeneous catalysis has been motivated by observations that abundant reduced gases are produced during serpentinization of olivine-rich ultramafic rocks, with metal oxides, fe–ni alloys, and fe–ni sulfides as byproducts (schrenk et al.
2013).
a range of experimental studies has demonstrated the effectiveness of these catalytic effects on accelerating the rate of alkanogenesis (horita and berndt 1999; foustoukos and seyfried 2004; fu et al.
2008).
concluding remarks
our understanding of the chemistry of aqueous carbon is advanced at conditions relevant for the shallow geologic environments; however, much remains to be done to extend this framework to the higher-pressure systems relevant to earth’s deep carbon cycle.
most progress has been made in development and application of equations of state for molecular fluids.
unfortunately, this simple framework is inadequate for treating many problems of mass transfer, where other species (ions, metal carbonates, organic acids, etc.
) must be taken into account.
the problem is compounded by limits in the application of hkf theory to ≤ 0.5 gpa, and relatively few experimental investigations at the requisite high pressures.
this situation is especially true for reduced carbon species: even if such species are metastable with respect to ch4, the kinetic inhibition of ch4 formation means that they may be important in many deep systems of interest.
nevertheless, recent advances hold promise for progress in this field.
developments of hydrothermal piston-cylinder and hydrothermal diamond-anvil cell approaches to mineral solubility and fluid characterization now allow for robust, routine experimental work at high p and t. in addition, recognition of the comparative simplicity of h2o behavior at high p and t has led to exploitation of simple correlations of mineral solubility and homogeneous equilibria with h2o density.
these advances are opening for the first time the realm of deep fluid flow to robust aqueous geochemical methods.
the combined experimental and theoretical avenues thus promise new insights into the terrestrial deep carbon cycle in the coming years.
﻿primordial origins of earth’s carbon
introduction
it is commonly assumed that the building blocks of the terrestrial planets were derived from a cosmochemical reservoir that is best represented by chondrites, the so-called chondritic earth model.
this view is possibly a good approximation for refractory elements (although it has been recently questioned; e.g., caro et al.
2008), but for volatile elements, other cosmochemical reservoirs might have contributed to earth, such as the solar nebula gas and/or cometary matter (owen et al.
1992; dauphas 2003; pepin 2006).
hence, in order to get insights into the origin of the carbon in earth, it is necessary to compare: (i) the elemental abundances and isotopic compositions of not only carbon, but also other volatile elements in potential cosmochemical “ancestors,” and (ii) the ancestral compositions with those of terrestrial volatiles.
this approach is the only one that has the potential for understanding the origin of the carbon in earth but it has several intrinsic limitations.
first, the terrestrial carbon budget is not well known, and, for the deep reservoir(s) such as the core and the lower mantle, is highly model-dependent (dasgupta 2013; wood et al.
2013).
second, the cosmochemical reservoir(s) that contributed volatile elements to proto-earth may not exist anymore because planet formation might have completely exhausted them (most of the mass present in the inner solar system is now in venus and earth).
third, planetary formation processes (accretion, differentiation, early evolution of the atmospheres) might have drastically modified the original elemental and isotopic compositions of the volatile elements in earth.
despite these limitations, robust constraints on the origin(s) of the carbon in earth can be deduced from comparative planetology of volatile elements, which is the focus of this chapter.
carbon in the cloud of gas and dust from which the solar system formed was probably mainly in the forms of gaseous co and of organic-rich carbonaceous dust (e.g., zubko et al.
2004).
other forms of carbon, such as ch4, volatile organics, and diamonds, were also probably present but in much smaller proportions.
in primitive meteorites, the depletion of carbon relative to refractory elements and normalized to the solar composition indicates that indeed a large fraction of this element was not in refractory phase(s) and had a volatile element behavior like hydrogen, nitrogen, and noble gases (e.g., anders and grevesse 1989; lodders 2003).
furthermore, in primitive meteorites, the total amounts of carbon, nitrogen, and trapped noble gases tend to correlate (otting and zärhinger 1967; kerridge 1985).
thus, to first order the noble gases can be taken as proxies for the behavior of carbon during planetary building events, keeping in mind that under specific conditions, such as low oxygen fugacities and in the presence of metal, carbon and nitrogen might have behaved more like refractory elements than like highly volatile elements, such as noble gases.
in this chapter, we first discuss the origin of the carbon isotopes in the universe and in the solar system.
we present estimates of the elemental and isotopic compositions of carbon and, when necessary, of other volatile elements in various solar system reservoirs.
we then discuss the latest estimates of the carbon content and isotopic compositions in the different terrestrial reservoirs.
from the comparison between these contrasting inventories, we discuss the various possible processes of delivery of volatiles to earth.
finally, the early terrestrial carbon cycle is introduced.
carbon in the universe
nucleosynthesis of carbon and stellar evolution
only hydrogen, helium, and some lithium were created in significant amounts in the big bang (table 1).
all other elements were formed by nucleosynthesis in stars (e.g., burbidge et al.
1957; truran and heger 2003; meyer and zinner 2006), except for most lithium, beryllium, and boron, which are largely the products of fragmentation (spallation) of heavier nuclei by energetic cosmic rays in the interstellar medium.
the build-up of elements (and isotopes) heavier than helium once star formation began in galaxies is often referred to as galactic chemical evolution (gce).
stars range in mass from the smallest brown dwarfs with mass of ~0.012 solar masses (mo) to super massive stars of >100 mo.
nucleosynthesis of ever-heavier isotopes is the prime energy source for stars and it proceeds in stages that require increasing temperatures and pressures with each new stage.
the first stages of nucleosynthesis, deuterium (d + 1h = 3he) and lithium (7li + 1h = 2 4he) burning, occur even as a star is still forming/contracting (pre-main sequence).
brown dwarfs, the lowest mass stars (0.012-0.08 mo), do not get beyond the deuterium-burning stage.
higher mass stars join the main sequence, where they spend most of their lives when they begin burning 1h in their cores.
hydrogen burning converts 1h to 4he via proton-proton chain and cno cycle reactions.
in the cno cycle, carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen isotopes inherited from earlier generations of stars “catalyze” the conversion of 1h to 4he.
the isotopes 13c, 14n, and 17o are important intermediate products of the cno cycle.
the main sequence life of a star ends when it has exhausted all the 1h in its core.
in <10 mo stars, hydrogen burning continues in a shell above the core and the star becomes a red giant branch (rgb) star.
massive convection at this transition brings hydrogen-burning products to the stellar surface, most notably 13c, 14n, and 17o.
eventually, contraction of the core and mass added to it from the hydrogen-burning shell produce conditions that enable the next stage, core helium burning.
in helium burning, three 4he nuclei are fused together in the triple-alpha reaction, to form 12c.
further alpha addition leads to the formation of 16o, but reaction rates beyond this are very slow.
during core helium burning, the entire star contracts and it leaves the rgb.
however, once helium is exhausted in the core, shell burning resumes and the star joins the asymptotic giant branch (agb).
for stars of ~3-10 mo, there is a second dredge-up of hydrogen-burnt material into the envelope of the star.
the 12c/13c ratios in the envelopes of most stars at the beginning of the agb are <10, but once alternating phases of hydrogen and helium burning in shells above the exhausted core become established, 12c-rich helium-burnt material is periodically mixed into the envelope.
for ≤4 mo stars, the result of adding this material to the envelop is a rapid increase in both the 12c/13c and the c/o ratios.
eventually, so much 12c is added that the c/o ratio of the envelope, which was initially less than one, exceeds one.
for 4-10 mo stars, conditions at the base of the envelope allow for some hydrogen burning, which destroys much of the added 12c, so that the 12c/13c ratio remains low and the c/o ratio stays below one.
the chemistry of the envelope during the agb is important because the agb stars begin to lose their envelopes in massive stellar winds, the development of which is driven at least in part by dust formation.
the chemistry of envelopes dictates the types of dust that form—envelopes with c/o < 1 are dominated by crystalline and amorphous silicates and oxides, with most of the carbon tied up in co, while those with c/o > 1 are dominated by sic and graphite and/or amorphous carbon, and most of the oxygen is in co.
these agb winds are important sources of freshly synthesized material, particularly 13c and 17o, and dust for the interstellar medium (ism).
eventually, the entire envelope is lost, leaving behind the inert core, now a white dwarf, which is dominated in most cases by 12c and 16o.
the cores of the most massive agb stars may experience carbon burning, which converts 12c to 20ne and 24mg, producing an o-ne-mg white dwarf.
a white dwarf is not always the final state of an intermediate mass star.
if it is part of a close binary, it can gain mass from its less evolved companion.
the increase in temperature and pressure at the surface as material is accreted eventually results in a nova explosion driven by runaway cno cycle reactions (12c/13c < 5).
however, not all the accreted material is blown off in a nova explosion, and if after repeated nova events the mass of a white dwarf eventually exceeds ~1.4 mo it will explode as a type ia supernova.
once 9-25 mo stars leave the main sequence, their initial evolution is not unlike that of intermediate mass ones, with the development of a supergiant phase and dredge-up that enriches the envelope in cno-cycle products.
however, there is never any dredge-up of helium-burnt material, so the c/o < 1.
significant mass loss and dust formation is observed to occur during the supergiant phase, but the envelope is never entirely lost before the star becomes a type ii supernova.
the internal structure of the pre-supernova star is a series of shells that have experienced ever more advanced stages of nucleosynthesis with increasing depth.
these include a relatively massive, carbon-rich helium-burning shell, but the majority of the shells are oxygen-rich.
two of the major nucleosynthetic products in type ii supernovae are 12c and 16o.
further nucleosynthesis occurs during the explosion, producing the elements heavier than iron.
for the most massive stars, (> 25 mo), mass loss during the supergiant phase is so vigorous that the envelope is lost, exposing hydrogen-burnt material directly at the surface.
with continued mass loss, the products of hydrogen burning, such as 14n, become highly overabundant.
the star is now a wolf-rayet star.
further mass loss reveals helium-burnt material, rich in 12c and 16o (c/o > 1), and it is only at this stage that dust formation is observed.
the ultimate fate of a wr star is a type ib supernova that produces a similar array of elements/isotopes to type iis.
galactic chemical evolution
the lifetimes of stars vary dramatically with their masses.
stars that are only slightly less massive than the sun have lifetimes that are of the order of the age of the universe, > 1010 years.
these low-mass stars will not have contributed to gce and will not be discussed further here.
intermediate and massive stars (> 1 mo) have lifetimes that range from ~1010 years at the low mass end to only a few million years at the high mass end.
early in the history of the galaxy, massive stars (their winds and type ii and ib supernovae) would have been the main sources of elements/isotopes heavier than helium.
the main products would have been isotopes like 12c and 16o, so-called primary isotopes because they can be built up from the primary products of the big bang (hydrogen and helium).
with time, and after several generations of massive star formation, the longer-lived intermediate mass stars would have started dying and isotopes like 13c and 17o would have begun to build up.
evidence for this gce can be found in long-lived low-mass stars, some of which can have very low abundances of elements heavier than helium (low metallicity).
because rates of star formation decrease with increasing radius from the galactic center, the effects of gce can also be seen in the carbon and oxygen isotopic compositions of the interstellar medium, with 12c/13c and 16o/17o ratios increasing more-or-less monotonically with radial distance.
carbon in the interstellar medium and the presolar molecular cloud
once injected into the ism, stellar material is subject to a number of energetic processes that modifies it.
these events include supernova-driven shock waves, cosmic rays, and uv irradiation.
in the diffuse ism, these energetic processes mean that complex molecules cannot form and dust is either damaged or destroyed.
most rock-forming elements are condensed in amorphous silicate dust, while carbon is distributed between co and a poorly characterized carbonaceous dust (zubko et al.
2004; draine and li 2007).
in the higher densities of molecular clouds, most of the material is shielded from shock waves and uv irradiation.
the interiors of molecular clouds are also much denser and colder than the diffuse ism—temperatures may reach 10 k or less.
as a result, all but the most volatile material is condensed in icy dust grains.
despite these temperatures, a complex chemistry can occur in molecular clouds in the gas phase, on grain surfaces, and even within grains (herbst and van dishoeck 2009).
this chemistry is driven to a large extent by cosmic rays that can penetrate the clouds—activation barriers for reactions between cosmic ray generated ions and other gaseous species are essentially zero, allowing for reactions at even these very low temperatures.
because the reaction temperatures are so low, extreme isotopic fractionations can be generated.
deuterium, for instance, can be enriched by several orders of magnitude in water and simple organic molecules.
carbon content and isotopic composition of the solar nebula
roughly 99.8% of the total mass of the present solar system is in the sun.
thus, the general assumption is that the sun’s bulk composition must closely resemble the average composition of the material from which the solar system formed.
except for the brief, early episode that destroyed most of the deuterium and lithium, the outer regions of the sun are unaffected by nucleosynthesis in the stellar interior (e.g., geiss and bochsler 1982).
therefore, spectroscopic measurements of the sun’s photosphere combined with hydrodynamic models of its atmosphere can be used to determine most elemental and even some isotopic abundances (asplund et al.
2009).
to estimate the primordial solar or “cosmic” composition, small corrections to the present-day photospheric abundances are needed to account for gravitational settling and diffusion of elements that deplete the photosphere over the lifetime of the solar system (turcotte et al.
1998).
solar photospheric abundances have been measured for most elements, although they continue to be refined (asplund et al.
2009).
in particular, since 2002 there has been a significant revision downwards in the abundances of carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen.
the composition of the solar wind and jupiter’s atmosphere can also provide useful constraints for the abundances of some elements and isotopes.
tables 2 and 3 list the abundances and isotopic compositions of a restricted number of elements that are particularly relevant here.
figure 1 compares the isotope variations of hydrogen and nitrogen in the solar system, which show a close affinity between primitive meteorites and earth.
to first order, the solar composition resembles the compositions of young stars in the local neighborhood, as well as the composition of the local interstellar medium (e.g., nieva and przybilla 2011).
there is scatter in the compositions of other stars in the vicinity of the sun.
in part, this diversity reflects uncertainties in the measurements, but it also reflects spatial and temporal variations in the compositions of the interstellar material from which the stars formed (kobayashi and nakasato 2011).
the composition of the interstellar medium is expected to vary in time and space as a result of the infall of material onto the galactic disk, local “pollution” by highly evolved mass-losing stars (e.g., supernovae, novae, and agb stars), and because of an overall gradient in star formation rates.
nevertheless, the solar composition is a useful and commonly used reference with which to compare the compositions of other astronomical objects.
remarkably, the composition of one group of primitive meteorites, the ci chondrites, closely resembles the non-volatile (i.e., not including hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and the noble gases) photospheric abundances.
in fact, the resemblance is so close that the appropriately scaled ci abundances of many elements and most isotopes are preferred over the photospheric abundances because they can be measured more accurately (e.g., lodders 2003; asplund et al.
2009).
the general assumption that the bulk isotopic compositions of the elements in ci chondrites are solar is not valid for the most volatile elements, such as hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and the noble gases.
this is because physical and chemical processes in the solar nebula produced several carriers of these elements (e.g., h2, h2o, co, ch4, nh3, and n2, as well as dust/ice) with different volatilities that were physically and isotopically fractionated relative to one another, so that the ci chondrites did not accrete all of these carriers when they formed.
because solar (or ci) is the starting composition from which all solar system materials are assumed to have ultimately evolved, the compositional variations of solar system objects, particularly meteorites, are often expressed as deviations relative to ci.
here we also use a ci-cm average composition for volatile abundances, since cm-type meteorites such as murchison are also remarkably primitive and volatile rich, present analogies with micrometeorites (another potentially important source of terrestrial volatiles, see below), and most cms have experienced less aqueous alteration than cis.
volatile abundances and isotope compositions in comets with special reference to carbon
the volatile species emitted by comets are dominated by water, followed by co, co2, nh3, and simple organic molecules (bockelée-morvan et al.
2004; mumma and charnley 2012).
to date, there have been no unambiguous remote detections of noble gases in comets.
helium and neon have been measured in cometary matter from comet wild 2 (or 81p/wild 2) that was returned to earth by the stardust mission (marty et al.
2008).
the isotopic composition of neon more closely resembles that of neon trapped in chondrites (phase “q” neon) rather than that of solar wind neon, and the helium and neon abundances were found to be very high and only matched by lunar regolith that had been irradiated by the solar wind (sw) for long periods of time.
these observations suggest that the light noble gases in stardust matter were implanted by solar irradiation early in the formation of the solar system, provided that phase q neon is indeed derived from solar neon due to isotope fractionation during implantation, as suggested by some models (see ott 2002, for a review).
hence implantation of solar gases could be a significant source for trace gases, but probably not for carbon that is predominantly in organic compounds.
based on the data obtained by the vega-1 spacecraft as it flew past comet halley, much of the carbon in that comet is in c-, h-, o-, and n-rich (chon) dust particles (kissel and krueger 1987; jessberger et al.
1988).
the c/mg ratio in halley dust is 6-12 times that of ci chondrites (jessberger et al.
1988), significantly higher than for the particles captured by the stardust mission to comet 81p/wild 2 (brownlee et al.
2006).
this difference could be largely due to the high relative velocity (6 km/s) between the stardust spacecraft and the wild 2 particles at the time they were captured.
the particles were captured in a very low-density medium, but the large kinetic energies of the cometary particles would have favored the preservation of only the more competent and refractory materials.
nevertheless, variations in composition between comets cannot be ruled out.
for comet halley, delsemme (1991) estimated a bulk composition of 43 wt.% water, 26 wt.% organics, and 31 wt.% silicates.
if most of the organics is in chon-like material (kissel and krueger 1987) that is ~70 wt.% carbon, this would mean that halley-like comets have ~18 wt.% carbon (table 1).
greenberg (1998) arrived at a similar composition for comets in general using a range of constraints, including the halley data.
this carbon content would correspond to a bulk h/c molar ratio for halley of about four, not so different from ratios observed in volatile-rich ci and cm carbonaceous chondrites (molar h/c of 3-13).
interplanetary dust particles
interplanetary dust particles (idps) are small particles that are collected in the upper atmosphere (bradley 2003).
most idps are < 50-100 μm across.
larger particles, known as cluster idps, tend to be very fragile and fragment on the collectors.
their small size and/or fluffy nature means that idps slow down relatively gently during atmospheric entry.
consequently, unlike their larger and/or denser counterparts that at least partially melt (cosmic spherules and micrometeorites) and often vaporize, idps are less severely heated on entering the atmosphere.
dynamical arguments suggest that idps have both cometary and asteroidal sources (e.g., messenger et al.
2003a).
most idps that have been studied have grossly (factors of 2-3) chondritic elemental compositions, except for volatile elements that can be lost during atmospheric entry heating or are subject to terrestrial contamination (schramm et al.
1989; thomas et al.
1993; kehm et al.
2002).
extraterrestrial particles with non-chondritic compositions occur in collections, but these objects are more difficult to distinguish from terrestrial contaminants and so are rarely studied.
the chondritic particles fall into two morphological groups—porous (cp-) and smooth (cs-) particles.
the cp-idps are largely anhydrous, composed mostly of submicron crystalline and amorphous silicates, metal, sulphide, and organic matter.
the silicate compositions tend to be very heterogeneous.
because of their very fine-grained nature, high degree of chemical disequilibrium, and high concentration of organic matter and presolar grains, cp-idps are thought to be the most primitive solar system materials available for study.
in the cs-idps, the silicates are dominated by hydrous minerals (predominantly serpentines and clay minerals).
although not identical, the cs-idps resemble the matrices of the aqueously altered chondrites.
because of their resemblance to chondrites and the general belief that comets did not experience aqueous alteration, it is widely assumed that cs-idps are derived from asteroids.
on the other hand, there are no meteorites that resemble cp-idps, which, along with their apparently very primitive nature, has led most researchers to conclude that cp-idps are from comets.
a cometary origin of at least some cp-idps is supported by the high abundances of isotopically anomalous organic matter and presolar grains in them (e.g., floss et al.
2006; busemann et al.
2009; duprat et al.
2010).
on average, the abundance of carbon in idps is ~12 wt.% (thomas et al.
1993), roughly three times that in ci chondrites, although there is considerable variation.
most of this carbon is in organic matter.
messenger et al.
(2003b) reviewed the hydrogen, nitrogen and carbon isotopic compositions of idps.
their bulk carbon isotopic compositions fall within the terrestrial range, but their average isotopic composition of δ13c = -45 ‰ is lighter than any bulk meteorites or the bulk earth (although for earth the bulk carbon isotope composition is not precisely known, see below).
hydrogen and nitrogen isotopic compositions vary enormously within and between idps.
the most striking features of the hydrogen and nitrogen in idps are their often very large deuterium and 15n enrichments.
these enrichments are poorly correlated despite generally being associated with organic matter (see also: aléon et al.
2003; keller et al.
2004; floss et al.
2006; busemann et al.
2009).
the hydrogen and nitrogen isotopic variations are similar to those seen in the more primitive chondrites (e.g., floss and stadermann 2009) and their organic matter (e.g., busemann et al.
2006) when they are analyzed at similar spatial scales to idps.
meteorites
with the rare exceptions of lunar and martian falls, meteorites are fragments of asteroids from the asteroid belt located between the orbits of mars and jupiter.
they are broadly divided into primitive chondrites, and achondrites that have undergone melting and differentiation on their parent bodies (e.g., scott and krot 2003).
achondrites generally have low abundances of carbon and other volatiles (hydrogen, nitrogen, and noble gases), presumably because their carriers were largely destroyed during melting.
the notable exceptions are the ureilites that contain up to ~5-7 wt.% in poorly graphitized carbon and the shock-produced high-pressure carbon allotropes diamond and lonsdaleite.
the ureilites are a potent potential source of earth’s carbon.
however, their ci-cm-normalized hydrogen and nitrogen contents are much lower than for carbon.
later on, we will argue that the relative abundances of earth’s volatiles are ci-cm-like.
hence, if ureilites were a major source of earth’s carbon, sources that were strongly depleted in carbon relative to the other volatiles must be found.
to date, no such sources have been identified.
consequently, the ureilites notwithstanding, here we will concentrate on the chondrites as the most likely sources of earth’s volatiles.
historically, the chondrites have been divided into three classes based on their compositions and mineralogies (ordinary, carbonaceous, and enstatite).
these three classes in turn have been subdivided into a number of groups: ordinary chondrites into h, l, and ll; carbonaceous chondrites into ci, cm, cr, cv, co, cb, ch, and ck; and enstatite chondrites into eh and el.
the name carbonaceous chondrite is a historical one and is a bit misleading because some ordinary and enstatite chondrites contain more carbon than some carbonaceous chondrites (table 4).
the chondrite classification scheme is still evolving as more meteorites are found—two new classes (r and k chondrites) have been identified, and a number of individual meteorites do not belong to any recognized group.
after formation, the chondrites experienced secondary modification (thermal metamorphism and aqueous alteration) on their parent bodies.
a petrographic classification scheme for secondary processes divides the chondrites into 6 types—types 3 to 6 reflect increasing extent of thermal metamorphism, and types 3 to 1 reflect increasing degrees of aqueous alteration.
by convention, the chemical classification is followed by the petrologic one (e.g., ci1, cm2, cv3).
the chondrites are principally made up of three components—chondrules, refractory inclusions, and fine-grained matrix—whose relative abundances vary widely (brearley and jones 1998).
refractory inclusions and chondrules are high-temperature objects, and normally contain little or no carbon.
almost all the carbon in the most primitive chondrites is found in their matrices, as are the other most volatile elements and presolar circumstellar grains.
the matrix abundances of these materials in all chondrites are similar to those in ci chondrites (alexander et al.
2005, 2007; huss 1990; huss and lewis 1994).
the main carbonaceous component in chondrites is organic, but aqueously altered meteorites often also contain carbonate (table 4).
the organics in chondrites also account for a significant fraction of the hydrogen and most of the nitrogen in the bulk chondrites, as well as being associated with the carrier of most of the noble gases.
carbon is also present in “primitive” meteorites as nanodiamonds that can make up to ~1,000 ppm of the matrix in chondrites (huss 1990).
in bulk, the nanodiamonds contain a trace noble gas component (so-called xenon-hl) that is clearly of nucleosynthetic origin, so at least some of them are circumstellar.
however, nanodiamonds have bulk carbon and nitrogen bulk isotopic compositions that are solar (e.g., ott et al.
2012), and a dual origin (solar system and inheritance from the presolar molecular cloud) cannot be ruled out.
other trace carbonaceous components include circumstellar sic and graphite that formed around supernovae, novae, and agb stars prior to the formation of the solar system (e.g., nittler 2003).
in all chondrite groups, the carbon content decreases with increasing thermal metamorphism, hence the low minimum carbon contents of cv, co, and ordinary chondrites.
generally, little or no carbon remains by the type 3-4 transition, and if any remains much of it may be terrestrial contamination (alexander et al.
1998).
the ck and r chondrites have all been heavily metamorphosed, which is why they have not been included in table 4.
only in the highly reduced enstatite chondrites is carbonaceous material preserved to higher metamorphic grades (grady et al.
1986; alexander et al.
1998).
aqueous alteration can also modify this organic matter, but the effects tend to be subtler (alexander et al.
2007, 2010; herd et al.
2011).
hence, to understand the origins of this organic material, here we concentrate on the most primitive chondrites (ci, cr, cm, and tagish lake) available to us.
the organic matter in chondrites—relationship to idps, comets, and ism
the organic matter in chondrites can be divided into soluble (som) and insoluble (iom) fractions (gilmour 2003; pizzarello et al.
2006).
even in the most primitive meteorites, the concentrations of traditionally defined som, that which is soluble in typical solvents (e.g., water, methanol, toluene, etc.
), is no more than a few hundred parts per million.
the som is composed of a very complex suite of compounds that include amino acids, carboxylic acids, and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (pahs).
the iom and carbonates are usually assumed to make up the bulk (>75 %) of the carbon in chondrites.
however, the true iom, that which remains insoluble even after demineralization with acids, only comprises about half of the bulk carbon in primitive chondrites (table 4).
the remainder is in a poorly understood material that is insolvent until hydrolyzed by acids, but it has a composition that is probably not very different from the iom (e.g., alexander et al.
2012).
for this discussion, it will be assumed that the iom and the hydrolysable material are closely related.
the most primitive meteoritic iom has an elemental composition (c100h75n4o15s4; alexander et al.
2007) that is similar to the average composition (c100h80n4o20s2) of comet halley chon particles (kissel and krueger 1987).
the iom appears to be composed of small pahs decorated and cross-linked by short, highly-branched aliphatic material (e.g.
cody et al.
2002).
at least in terms of hydrogen, nitrogen, and carbon isotopes, the bulk compositions and range of compositions seen in the most primitive meteoritic iom (busemann et al.
2006) also resembles the iom in the most primitive idps (aléon et al.
2000; messenger 2000; brownlee et al.
2006; busemann et al.
2009).
the large deuterium and 15n isotopic enrichments in iom in chondrites and idps are thought to be the result of ion-molecule reactions and other processes in the ism (robert and epstein 1982; yang and epstein 1983; messenger 2000; aléon et al.
2003) and/or the outer solar system (aikawa et al.
2002; gourier et al.
2008).
there are variations in the isotopic composition of iom within and between chondrites and idps, but these mostly reflect parent body processing in chondrites (alexander et al.
2007, 2010; herd et al.
2011) and atmospheric entry heating of idps (bockelée-morvan et al.
2004).
the organic particles in the stardust samples also have hydrogen and nitrogen isotopic anomalies (brownlee et al.
2006; mckeegan et al.
2006; matrajt et al.
2008; de gregorio et al.
2010).
the hydrogen isotope anomalies in the stardust samples are more subdued than in the most primitive chondrites and idps, but this difference may reflect modification during capture.
a further link between the organics in chondrites, idps, and comets are the presence of organic nanoglobules in all three (flynn et al.
2006; garvie and buseck 2006; de gregorio et al.
2010; matrajt et al.
2012).
thus, the organics in meteorites, cp-idps, and comets appear to be related despite their parent bodies’ very different formation conditions and locations.
the bulk carbon content of ci chondrites, which is largely in organic material, represents ~10% of the carbon available (assuming a solar composition for the primordial solar system).
the carbon contents of comet halley and the parent bodies of idps may be much higher (30-100% of available carbon), although the uncertainties are large (e.g., alexander 2005).
nevertheless, whether the organic matter was inherited from the protosolar molecular cloud or formed in the solar system, the formation mechanism was relatively efficient.
the solar system: dynamics
despite its apparently well-ordered orbital architecture, the solar system’s history is thought to have been dynamic.
indeed, there are at least two phases of evolution during which earth could very well have been prevented from forming or have been destroyed.
our understanding of these phases comes from models of orbital dynamics and should thus not be interpreted as absolute truth.
indeed, alexander et al.
(2012) have questioned some of the predictions of the “nice” and “grand tack” models that will be described below.
nonetheless, it is important to realize that simpler models systematically fail to reproduce the observed orbital architecture of the solar system (e.g., raymond et al.
2009).
during the first dangerous phase, interactions with the gaseous protoplanetary disk may have caused jupiter to migrate inward to just 1.5 au, in the immediate vicinity of earth’s formation zone, before “tacking” and migrating back outward beyond 5 au (the “grand tack” model of walsh et al.
2011).
this excursion of jupiter into the inner solar system may explain the relatively small mass of mars.
had the timing of events, particularly of saturn’s orbital migration relative to jupiter’s, been different, jupiter might well have continued migrating inward and decimated earth’s building blocks.
in the second dangerous phase the giant planets are thought to have undergone a dynamical instability that re-arranged their orbital architecture and caused the late heavy bombardment (lhb; the instability is referred to as the “nice” model of gomes et al.
2005; tsiganis et al.
2005; and morbidelli et al.
2007).
although this did cause a large increase in the impact flux throughout the solar system, it was an extremely weak instability: the eccentricity distribution of extra-solar planets suggests that between 50 and 90% of all planetary systems with giant planets undergo much stronger instabilities that would likely have destroyed earth, or at least provoked collisions between the terrestrial planets (raymond et al.
2010, 2011).
even in the current epoch, chaotic dynamics driven by gravitational interactions between planets allow for the possibility of a dynamical instability and future collisions between the terrestrial planets (laskar and gastineau 2009).
we now review the current paradigm of the formation history of the solar system, focusing on the growth of the terrestrial planets and how they acquired their volatiles, notably their carbon.
for a more detailed account of the physics of planet formation, the reader is directed to recent reviews on the subject, notably papaloizou and terquem (2006) and morbidelli et al.
(2012).
the solar system formed from a disk of gas and dust orbiting the young sun, sometimes called the “solar nebula” or “protosolar nebula.” this disk is assumed to have had the same bulk composition as the sun, but the composition of the gas and dust phases was not uniform throughout the disk.
driven by both stellar and viscous heating, the disk was hotter closer to the sun and cooler farther away.
given the temperature-dependent condensation sequence, any given species remains in the gas phase interior to an orbital radius that corresponds to its condensation temperature for the relevant, very low pressure, and should condense beyond that radius.
for example, interior to the “snow line,” where the temperature is ~170 k, water will remain in the vapor phase, but beyond the snow line it condenses as ice.
likewise, each species in a disk has its own condensation line, exterior to which it will condense and interior to which it remains in the gas phase.
the composition of solids that formed within the disk thus reflects the local temperature and the disk’s composition; this confluence is called the condensation sequence (pollack et al.
1994; lodders 2003).
the dominant carbon-bearing condensable species in disks are ch4 and co (e.g., dodson-robinson et al.
2009), although, as noted in the preceding section, carbon-rich dust that is not necessarily seen astronomically may constitute another important, possibly dominant, source of carbon.
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (pahs) are observed to be abundant in the interstellar medium (tielens 2008) and in carbonaceous meteorites (see previous section), and may thus constitute an important source of carbon (kress et al.
2010).
two important orbital radii in terms of carbon abundance have been proposed: a radius analogous to the snow line beyond which carbon can condense—referred to as the “tar line” by lodders (2004); and the radius interior to which the pahs that were initially presented in the disk are destroyed by thermally-driven reactions—dubbed the “soot line” by kress et al.
(2010).
however, complex, refractory organics like those seen in meteorites, idps and comets do not form spontaneously via condensation of ch4, co, etc.
at low temperatures.
fischer-tropsch-type (ftt) synthesis can occur if the appropriate catalysts are present, but there is no evidence that the organics in meteorites, for instance, formed by this mechanism (e.g., alexander et al.
2007).
the iom does start to break down at temperatures of 300-400 °c, thus a more appropriate definition for a “tar line” would be the isotherm beyond which the iom-like material is stable in the solar nebula.
protoplanetary disks are not static, but evolve in time.
the gaseous component of the disk is dissipated on a timescale of a few million years, as inferred from observations of infrared excesses in the spectra of young stars (haisch et al.
2001; meyer et al.
2008).
as the disk dissipates it cools, such that the location of the various condensation fronts move inward in time (sasselov and lecar 2000; ciesla and cuzzi 2006; dodson-robinson et al.
2009).
the exact positions of the condensation fronts depend on the disk’s detailed temperature and pressure structure, which in turn is determined by poorly constrained physical characteristics, such as the viscosity and the opacity (e.g., garaud and lin 2007).
in addition, dust particles do not remain on static orbits within the disk but migrate radially due to drag forces and pressure, although models suggest that dust migration probably does not produce large pileups (hughes and armitage 2010).
terrestrial planets and giant planet cores form from the dust component of the disk.
giant planets subsequently accrete massive gaseous atmospheres directly from the gaseous component of the disk.
given the strong constraint that gaseous protoplanetary disks only survive for a few million years (haisch et al.
2001), and the equally strong isotopic constraints that earth’s accretion lasted for at least 11 to 30 million years (yin et al.
2002; kleine et al.
2002) and possibly closer to 50 to 100 ma, touboul et al.
2007), it appears that gas giant planets form faster than the much smaller terrestrial planets.
this difference is counter-intuitive, given that the giant planets’ cores are thought to be more massive than earth (guillot 2005), and may be explained by the simple increase in the amount of condensable material in the giant planet-forming part of the disk because it lies beyond the snow line (stevenson and lunine 1988; kokubo and ida 2002).
although the model we present is the current paradigm, we note that there exists an alternate “top-down” model for giant planet formation that invokes gravitational instability in the gas disk (boss, 1997).
planet formation occurs in a series of dynamical steps.
first, dust grains agglomerate to form mm- to cm-sized pebbles or possibly even m-sized boulders via low-velocity collisions (e.g., blum and wurm 2008).
next, planetesimals form from the pebbles/boulders, probably by hydrodynamical processes that efficiently concentrate these particles to a large enough degree to create gravitationally-bound clumps (chiang and youdin 2010; and references therein).
the sizes of planetesimals is debated: some formation and collisional models suggest that planetesimals are “born big,” with radii of hundreds to a thousand kilometers (johansen and youdin 2007; cuzzi et al.
2008, 2010; morbidelli et al.
2009; chambers 2010), while other models argue in favor of much smaller, sub-km sized planetesimals (weidenschilling 2011).
the next phase in the growth of solid bodies is the accretion of planetary embryos from planetesimals.
a planetesimal that grows larger than its neighbors can rapidly increase its collisional cross section due to gravitational focusing and undergo runaway accretion (safronov and zvjagina 1969; greenberg et al.
1978; wetherill and stewart 1993).
runaway accretion slows to so-called “oligarchic growth” as the orbits of nearby planetesimals are excited by the growing embryo (ida and makino 1992; kokubo and ida 1998).
this process is thought to produce a population of embryos with comparable masses: roughly lunar to mars mass in the terrestrial planet region, and ~earth mass in the giant planet region (kokubo and ida 2002).
a giant planet core needs to reach at least 5 to 10 earth masses before it can efficiently accrete gas from the disk (ikoma et al.
2000), but the growth of giant planet cores from mars- to earth-mass embryos remains poorly understood.
in this size range, embryos are far more efficient at scattering planetesimals than accreting them, and standard growth models fail to produce giant planet cores in the lifetime of the gaseous disk (thommes et al.
2003).
however, two proposed mechanisms may help to solve this problem.
first, embryos are massive enough to have thin gaseous envelopes, which act to enhance their collisional cross section by a factor of up to ten or more in radius (inaba and ikoma 2003).
second, embryos probably experience large-scale orbital migration via both the back-reaction from planetesimal scattering (fernandez and ip 1984; kirsh et al.
2009) and via tidal interactions with the gaseous protoplanetary disk, often referred to as “type 1” migration (goldreich and tremaine 1980).
hydrodynamical models show that there exist locations in the disk where type 1 migration is convergent (lyra et al.
2010; paardekooper et al.
2011).
a combination of these mechanisms may allow relatively small embryos to rapidly grow into full-fledged giant planet cores (e.g., levison et al.
2010; horn et al.
2012), although this remains an area of active research.
giant planet cores accrete gas from the disk at a rate that is limited by their ability to cool and contract (i.e., their atmospheric opacity), thus freeing up space within their hill sphere for additional gas (e.g., hubickyj et al.
2005).
thus, gas accretion initially proceeds at a relatively slow pace; the combination of this time lag and the disk’s limited lifetime may explain why neptune-sized planets are so much more common than jupiter-sized planets among exoplanets (e.g., howard et al.
2010).
once the mass in a core’s gaseous envelope is comparable to the solid core mass, gas accretion enters a runaway phase and the planet becomes a gas giant in just ~105 years (mizuno 1980).
as the planet accretes, it clears an annular gap in the disk, which then constrains its accretion rate and final mass (e.g., lissauer et al.
2009).
once a giant planet clears a gap in the disk its orbital evolution is inextricably linked to the disk dynamics.
this behavior occurs because the gap prevents gas exterior to the planet’s orbit from interacting viscously with gas interior to the planet’s orbit.
as the disk viscously evolves and spreads radially, the vast majority of the gas spirals inward onto the star, and a small fraction of the mass spreads to large orbital radii to balance the angular momentum budget (lynden-bell and pringle 1974).
in the giant planet forming part of the disk, the gas flow is generally inward such that a gas giant is essentially dragged inward on the disk’s viscous timescale of 105-6 years in a process called “type 2” migration (lin and papaloizou 1986).
of course, orbital migration of both type 1 and type 2 only occurs in the presence of the massive but short-lived gaseous component of the disk.
when the disk dissipates, the gas giants have necessarily reached close to their final masses and orbits, but the most dynamic phase of terrestrial planet formation is in full swing.
the final phase in the growth of the terrestrial planets involves the collisional accumulation of planetesimals and planetary embryos.
embryos initially remain isolated from one another as they grow by accreting planetesimals and stay on low-eccentricity orbits via dynamical friction (kokubo and ida 1998).
embryos eventually start to interact with each other once the local surface density in planetesimals and embryos is comparable (kenyon and bromley 2006).
late-stage terrestrial accretion is thus characterized by slow growth by planetesimal-embryo impacts and punctuated growth by giant embryo-embryo impacts (wetherill 1985).
each planet’s feeding zone spreads outward and widens in time during this chaotic phase of strong gravitational scattering (raymond et al.
2006; fig.
2).
a planet’s feeding zone determines the mixture of material that condensed in different regions and at different temperatures, and thus the planet’s final composition.
the temperature at 1 au is usually thought to have been too hot throughout the disk phase for water to condense (boss 1998), although some disk models yield low enough temperatures at 1 au to allow water to condense (woolum and cassen 1999; sasselov and lecar 2000).
although it is possible that water vapor could be adsorbed onto grains at 1 au (muralidharan et al.
2009), it is generally thought that water must have been delivered to earth by impacts with icy bodies that formed at cooler temperatures.
primitive outer asteroidal material (c-complex) is a likely source of earth’s water (morbidelli et al.
2000; raymond et al.
2004, 2007).
c-complex asteroids are thought to be the sources of the carbonaceous chondrites, and of them ci and cm chondrites have compositions that most closely resemble the volatile elemental and isotopic composition of earth (alexander et al.
2012).
and it is during an advanced accretion phase that earth accreted the bulk of its water (fig.
2).
as we will discuss below, the same arguments hold for earth’s carbon.
measurements of isotopic chronometers, especially the hafnium-tungsten system, in meteorites and earth rocks tell us that earth’s last giant impact occurred at roughly 11 to 150 ma (kleine et al.
2002; yin et al.
2002; touboul et al.
2007).
this event is thought to have been an impact with a ~mars-sized body, which spun out a disk of material to form the moon (benz et al.
1986; canup and asphaug 2001).
mars, on the other hand, appears not to have undergone any giant impacts after just a few ma (dauphas and pourmand 2011).
mars may therefore represent a remnant embryo, while earth is a fully-grown planet that underwent many giant impacts.
after the end of the giant impact phase there remains a population of remnant planetesimals.
the final sweep up of these planetesimals occurs by gravitational scattering by the planets, and these planetesimals end up either colliding with the sun, a terrestrial or giant planet, or getting scattered outward into interstellar space.
the fraction of planetesimals that collide with the terrestrial planets provided the so-called “late veneer,” which is characterized by the incorporation of highly-siderophile elements (hses) into the planets’ mantles (kimura et al.
1974).
given that hses are “iron-loving,” they should have been sequestered into the core during planetary differentiation, and so their presence in the mantle indicates that they were accreted after the last core formation event or at least after the time when there was significant core-mantle re-equilibration.
the "late veneer" phase represents the tail end of accretion, and the source region of "late veneer" impactors is constrained by comparing the bulk mantle composition with meteorites (e.g., dauphas et al.
2004; burkhardt et al.
2011).
at even later times, a very small amount of material was added to earth during and after the late heavy bombardment (gomes et al.
2005, bottke et al.
2012).
figure 2 shows the evolution of a dynamical simulation of late stage terrestrial accretion from raymond et al.
(2006).
in the simulation, accretion transitions from the primordial accretion to the "late veneer" after the last giant impact that was energetic enough to stimulate core-mantle equilibration (and thus reset the hafnium-tungsten chronometer).
in this simulation the last giant impact occurred at ~60 ma for an earth analog planet (and 20 ma for a venus analog).
accretion simulations like the one from figure 2 have succeeded in reproducing a number of characteristics of the actual terrestrial planets, such as their number and approximate total mass (wetherill 1990) and their low orbital eccentricities and inclinations (raymond et al.
2006, 2009; o’brien et al.
2006; morishima et al.
2008, 2010).
in addition, these simulations were able to explain the origin and isotopic signature of earth’s water (morbidelli et al.
2000; raymond et al.
2007).
however, these simulations failed to produce realistic mars analogs.
planets at mars’ orbital distance were systematically a few to ten times more massive than the real mars (0.11 earth masses; wetherill, 1991; raymond et al.
2006, 2009; o’brien et al.
2006).
improvements in numerical resolution and the inclusion of additional physical effects have been unable to solve the mars problem (morishima et al.
2010).
the only successful solution to the mars problem came from a change in the “initial conditions.” the aforementioned simulations started from disks of planetesimals and embryos that stretched from a few tenths of an au out to 4 to 5 au, just inside jupiter’s current orbit.
mars formed big simply because there was too much mass in the mars’ feeding zone and no mechanism to clear out that mass.
however, hansen (2009) showed that if the terrestrial planets only formed from a narrow annulus of embryos from 0.7 to 1 au, a small mars is produced naturally as an edge effect.
earth and venus are big because they formed within the annulus of embryos, and mars and mercury are small because they were scattered beyond the annulus, thus limiting their growth.
in fact, hansen (2009) was able to reproduce the masses and orbital configurations of all of the terrestrial planets.
the only problem was that his initial conditions were completely ad-hoc.
walsh et al.
(2011) proposed a new model called the “grand tack,” which provides a solution to the mars problem while remaining consistent with the large-scale evolution of the solar system (fig.
3).
the model relies on the fact that, because the giant planets form much faster than the terrestrial planets, they can sculpt the disk of terrestrial embryos.
figure 4 illustrates the grand tack model.
the grand tack model starts late in the gas disk phase, when jupiter was fully formed but saturn had not yet grown to its final size.
jupiter migrated via the type 2 mechanism inward from its formation zone, assumed to be at a few au, perhaps just beyond the snow line.
meanwhile, saturn started to accrete gas and migrated inward rapidly, catching up with jupiter.
hydrodynamical simulations show that saturn is naturally trapped in the 2:3 mean motion resonance with jupiter (pierens and nelson 2008).
when the two planets are locked in this configuration, their direction of migration is switched to outward (masset and snellgrove 2001; morbidelli and crida, 2007; pierens and nelson 2008; pierens and raymond 2011).
jupiter and saturn migrate outward until the disk dissipates, stranding them close to their current orbits.
if jupiter’s “tack”—i.e., change in the direction of its migration—occurred at ~1.5 au, then the inner disk of embryos is naturally truncated at about 1 au.
the terrestrial planets that form from this disk are a quantitative match to the real ones (walsh et al.
2011).
although jupiter migrates through the asteroid belt twice (once going inward, once outward), it is re-populated by two distinct sources.
the inner belt contains planetesimals that originated interior to jupiter’s orbit and were subsequently scattered outward during jupiter’s inward migration, and then back inward during jupiter’s outward migration.
the efficiency with which inner disk planetesimals are implanted into the final asteroid belt is only ~0.1 %, but this is actually in very good agreement with the current belt.
the outer asteroid belt contains planetesimals that originated beyond jupiter’s orbit, either between the giant planets or beyond the ice giants’ orbits, and were scattered inward during outward migration and implanted with an efficiency of ~1 %.
thus, in the context of the grand tack model, s-complex asteroids represent leftovers from the terrestrial planet region and c-complex asteroids are leftovers from the giant planet region.
water delivery to earth occurs in the grand tack model in the form of c-complex material that is scattered inward past the asteroid belt during jupiter’s outward migration (walsh et al.
2011).
for every c-complex planetesimal that was implanted into the main belt, roughly 10 to 20 planetesimals were scattered onto orbits with roughly the same semi-major axis but with eccentricities high enough to intercept the inner annulus of embryos.
this c-complex material therefore represents a “pollution” of the inner annulus of embryos by c-complex planetesimals at the few percent level.
accretion simulations including this tail of c-complex material show that it does indeed deliver about the right amount of water to earth.
in the context of the grand tack model, carbon was delivered to earth by c-complex material, along with the water and other volatiles (see next section).
to conclude this section, we emphasize that although studies have mainly focused on the delivery of water to earth, the delivery of carbon represents a problem of comparable magnitude.
carbon chemistry in protoplanetary disks is complex, and the dominant species may have been ch4, co, refractory carbonaceous dust, and/or perhaps free pahs.
however, since carbonaceous chondrite meteorites are thought to represent c-complex asteroids, and since these represent the probable source of water on earth, carbon probably followed the same path as water in its delivery to earth.
clues to the origin of carbon on earth
terrestrial carbon inventory
making an inventory of terrestrial carbon is not an easy task.
the sizes of the main surface reservoirs of carbon (carbonates and reduced carbon in the biosphere and in hydrocarbons) are well documented (dasgupta 2013; hazen et al.
2013a; jones et al.
2013; manning et al.
2013; ni and keppler 2013;).
in contrast, the inventory of the deep carbon reservoirs is not well constrained (dasgupta 2013; shirey et al.
2013; wood et al.
2013), so that estimates require calibration relative to other geochemical proxies and are somewhat model-dependent.
estimates of bulk earth carbon content vary by over an order of magnitude (e.g., 50 ppm carbon for zhang and zindler 1993; ≥500 ppm carbon for marty 2012).
these values are nevertheless low compared to those of potential cosmochemical contributors (comets: 180,000 ppm; carbonaceous chondrites: 36,000 ppm, table 1).
below we review the carbon content of the major terrestrial reservoirs.
earth’s surface.
the major reservoirs of carbon at the surface of our planet are carbonates in marine and continental sedimentary rocks, and reduced carbon in the biosphere and in fossil hydrocarbons.
carbonates occur as continental massive units from ancient oceanic platforms, as oceanic sediments, and as veins and alteration phases in the oceanic crust (hazen et al.
2013a, b).
the amount of reduced carbon is lower than the carbonate reservoir by about a factor of  ~4 to 5.
current estimates of the total amount of carbon at earth’s surface are around 7-11 x 1021 moles (ronov and yaroshevskhiy 1976; javoy et al.
1982; holser et al.
1988; hayes and waldbauer 2006).
carbonates have δ13c values of around 0 ‰ relative to pdb (the standard pdb is a cretaceous carbonate) and terrestrial organic carbon is more depleted in 13c, with values around -30 ‰, which is a signature of its biogenic origin.
consequently, the bulk δ13c of the surface inventory is around -5 to -10 ‰.
the composition of this surface carbon may not have varied greatly in the geological past, since ancient sedimentary rocks have carbonate and organic carbon values in the same range (hayes and waldbauer 2006).
this bulk value is also surprisingly comparable to estimates of the bulk mantle value of -5 ‰; the surface inventory is a mixture of two pools of carbon with different isotopic compositions, one of which being of presumably biogenic origin.
this similarity and the constancy of the bulk surface value with time seems to indicate that the relative proportions of carbonates and reduced carbon have been about the same throughout the geological history, which has important implications both for the exchange of carbon between earth’s surface and deep interior, and for the size of the biosphere through time.
mantle.
the carbon content of mantle-derived material is generally very low because carbon is extensively outgassed from lavas.
thus, current estimates of the mantle carbon content are indirect and based on the calibration of carbon to specific geochemical tracers whose geochemical cycles are well constrained.
here we review current estimates of the carbon content of the mantle.
all of them are based on the assumption that carbon is incompatible during partial melting of the mantle source; that is, it goes quantitatively to the surface during magma generation and volcanism.
the highest rate of magma production takes place along divergent plate margins at mid-ocean ridges, which are also the locus of most of mantle degassing.
thus, most estimates are for the mantle source of such magmas, referred in the literature as the depleted mantle (dm).
the rare isotope of helium, 3he, is of primordial origin in earth, that is it was trapped within earth as it formed from a cosmochemical reservoir and it is still degassing from the mantle at present.
its abundance in the atmosphere is low as helium escapes to space.
the flux of 3he from the mantle has been quantified from excesses of 3he in deep-sea waters (knowing the residence time of the latter).
the original estimate of 1000 ± 300 moles 3he/yr (craig et al.
1975) has been recently revised downward to 527 ± 106 moles/yr (bianchi et al.
2010).
the c/3he molar ratio measured in mid-ocean ridge basalts (marty and jambon, 1987; marty and tolstikhin 1998) and in mid-ocean ridge hydrothermal vents is on average 2.2 ± 0.6 x 109.
together with an average partial melting rate of 12 ± 4 % for mid-ocean ridge basalts (morbs) and a total magma production rate of 21 km3/yr at all mid-ocean ridges, one obtains a carbon content of the morb mantle source of 27 ± 11 ppm carbon.
another approach is to analyze samples from the mantle that are not degassed, or for which degassing fractionation can be corrected for, and to calibrate carbon relative to a non-volatile trace element, such as niobium.
saal et al.
(2002) and cartigny et al.
(2008) estimated the co2/nb ratio of the dm at 240 and 530, respectively, resulting in estimated carbon contents for the dm of 19 ppm and 44 ppm, respectively.
hirschmann and dasgupta (2009) and salters and stracke (2004) estimated the carbon content of the dm at 14 ± 3 ppm and 16 ± 9 ppm, respectively, using similar approaches.
all these estimates suggest a carbon content for the dm of ~20 to 30 ppm, close to the bulk earth estimate of zhang and zindler (1993) of 50 ppm.
noble gases released at centers of hot spot volcanism (e.g., hawaii, yellostone, réunion) that are fed by mantle plumes have isotopic compositions suggesting that they come from a less degassed region of the mantle.
thus, the dm is unlikely to represent the bulk earth inventory.
potassium-40 is produced by the radioactive decay of 40k, with a half-life of 1.25 ga, and the total amount of radiogenic 40ar produced over 4.5 ga from terrestrial potassium can be readily computed.
a known fraction of 40ar is now in the atmosphere and the complementary amount of radiogenic 40ar trapped in silicate earth is obtained by mass balance.
for a bulk silicate earth (bse) potassium content of 280 ± 120 ppm (2 σ) (arevalo et al.
2009), about half of the 40ar produced over earth’s history is in the atmosphere, and the other half is therefore still trapped in silicate earth (allègre et al.
1996; ozima and podosek 2002).
the carbon content of the bse can be scaled to 40ar using the composition of gases and rocks from mantle plume provinces following the method presented in marty (2012), which gives 765 ppm carbon for the bse (with a large uncertainty of 420 ppm at the 2 σ level when all errors are propagated).
an independent estimate of the bse carbon content can be obtained using primordial noble gases.
extinct and extant radioactivities producing noble gas isotopes indicate that most of the non-radiogenic noble gases, such as 36ar, are in the atmosphere and their mantle abundances are order(s) of magnitude lower.
the mean c/36ar ratio of carbonaceous chondrites is 5.6 ± 2.0 x 107 (c and 36ar data from otting and zähringer 1967) and is not significantly different from the ratio for the much less volatile-rich enstatite chondrites (5.9 ± 4.2 x 107, computed with data from otting and zähringer 1967).
assuming a chondritic source and from the 36ar atmospheric inventory, one can compute a bulk earth carbon content that is 920 ± 330 ppm, which is within the uncertainties of the carbon content computed above using a different approach.
these independent estimates suggest that the terrestrial carbon content of the earth is within 500 to 1000 ppm—a c content that corresponds to the contribution of about 2 ± 1 wt.% carbonaceous chondrite (ci-cm) material to a dry proto-earth (fig.
4).
if this estimate is correct, there are several important implications for the origin of volatiles on earth.
(i) there exists large reservoir(s) of carbon in earth that are not yet documented.
the occurrence of gas-rich regions of the mantle is supported by the isotopic compositions of mantle plume-derived noble gases (helium, neon) isotope, which point to a mantle reservoir that is less degassed that the dm one;
(ii) most (>90 %) of the carbon is not at earth’s surface, but is trapped in bulk silicate earth, contrary to the case of noble gases that are mostly in the atmosphere;
(iii) the contribution of ~2 wt.% ci material for carbon and other volatile elements (fig.
4) is higher than the so-called “late veneer” of about 0.3 wt.% (range: 0.1-0.8 wt.%) of chondritic material to account for the mantle inventory of platinum group elements that never equilibrated with metal, presumably because they were added after the main episodes of core formation (kimura et al.
1974).
carbon in the core?
from experimental data, it has been proposed that carbon may be present in the core at the percent level (wood 1993; dasgupta and walker 2008; wood et al.
2013).
a high carbon content of the core would change dramatically the carbon inventory of earth, and also the bulk carbon isotope composition of our planet, since carbon stored in the core would be isotopically different/fractionated with respect to mantle carbon.
for instance, a carbon content of 2 % (wood 1993) in the core corresponds to a bse content of 6600 ppm carbon.
if the source of this carbon was chondritic, then it should have been accompanied by ~ 6 x 1016 moles of 36ar (using the chondritic c/36ar from the preceding subsection), which is an order of magnitude higher than the current estimate of the terrestrial inventory.
one could argue that the noble gases were largely lost to space from the primitive atmosphere, and that only the reactive volatiles, such as carbon and, presumably, nitrogen and hydrogen, were quantitatively trapped in earth.
however, the same argument against extensive sequestration of carbon into the core also applies to the halogens (sharp et al.
2009).
the chlorine content of bulk earth is 1.1 x 1023 g, or 3.6 x 10-7 mol 35cl/g.
because cl is not siderophile (sharp et al.
2009), chlorine is in the mantle, in the crust, and in the oceans.
the average carbonaceous chondrite 35cl/12c ratio is ~200.
the equivalent carbon concentration of a chondritic earth is 800 ppm, in fact remarkably comparable to the carbon content computed in the preceding subsection from the 40ar budget and from the c/36ar ratio.
the isotopic composition of terrestrial chlorine is similar to that of chondrites and there is, therefore, no reason to suspect that chlorine has been lost to space in early times.
whether or not the amount of carbon in the core is low is an open question that requires further metal-silicate partitioning experimental studies involving not only carbon, but also nitrogen, hydrogen, and noble gases.
volatile (c-h-n-noble gas) elemental and isotopic constraints
carbon isotopes are the primary source of information on the origin of this element in earth, but the message is ambiguous since carbon has only two isotopes and, because it is a light element, the extent of its fractionation can be high and can superimpose isotope fractionation effects to source heterogeneities.
the stable isotope compositions of other volatile elements, such as hydrogen (water) and nitrogen and the associated noble gases, are important supplementary sources of information on the origin of terrestrial carbon, and are discussed in this section.
the range of δ13c values of mantle carbon, based on the analysis of diamonds, morbs, mantle plume rocks, and volcanic gases is thought to be around -5 ± 3 ‰ (deines 1980; des marais and moore 1984; javoy et al.
1986; marty and zimmermann 1999).
lighter (more negative) values have been reported for a few morb glasses and volcanic gases and have been interpreted as being due to isotope fractionation during degassing (javoy et al.
1986).
lighter isotopic compositions in some of diamonds have generally been interpreted as due to isotopic fractionation or incorporation of recycled organic carbon (dienes 1980; cartigny et al.
1998).
because a large amount of carbon may be sequestrated in the core, a firm carbon isotope budget of earth is not yet possible.
however, the isotope fractionation of carbon between metal and silicate at the very high temperatures and pressures that prevailed during core formation are unlikely to have been larger than a few per mil.
terrestrial carbon might have been supplied by the following cosmochemical reservoirs (see also section above).
(i) the protosolar nebula.
solar-like neon is present in the mantle and indicates that a solar-like source supplied a fraction of the terrestrial volatile elements.
whether such a source also supplied carbon to earth is an open question.
from the analysis of solar wind implanted in lunar regolith grains, hashizume et al.
(2004) proposed that the solar wind isotopic composition is light, with an upper limit for δ13c of -105 ± 20 ‰.
the solar wind may be enhanced in the light isotopes due to coulomb drag, so that the solar value could be heavier than this limit by about 20-30 ‰ per mass unit for light elements like carbon, nitrogen, or oxygen (bodmer and bochsler 1998).
thus the solar carbon isotope composition could still be light, possibly lighter than -80 ‰.
if this estimate is correct, then the presence of solar carbon at depth should be reflected by a light carbon component for samples of deep mantle origin, like those associated with mantle plumes.
such an isotopically light carbon component has yet to be observed: mantle carbon shows values of around -5 ‰ whatever the source is, either morb-like or plume-like.
d/h and 15n/14n isotope systematics could only allow for a small (< 10 %) fraction of terrestrial hydrogen to be of solar origin (marty 2012; alexander et al.
2012).
(ii) comets.
the d/h ratios of these bodies are generally 2-3 times the terrestrial value (bockelée-morvan et al.
1998; 2008, mumma and charnley 2012), which led to the consensus view that ocean water, and, by extension other major volatiles, like carbon and nitrogen, cannot be derived solely from comets.
recently, a jupiter family comet, presumably originating from the kuiper belt, has been shown to have a terrestrial-like water d/h (hartogh et al.
2011), although alexander et al.
(2012) argue that the bulk d/h of this comet may be significantly higher if it contains halley-like abundances of organic matter and this organic matter has a d/h ratio like that in the most primitive meteorite organics.
15n/14n ratios of comets that have been measured to date are all much higher (δ15n > 800 ‰, where the reference is atmospheric nitrogen; arpigny et al.
2003; bockelée-morvan et al.
2008; mumma and charnley 2012) than the range of terrestrial values (δ15n from -30 to +40 ‰ for the most extreme end-members), which would preclude a major cometary contribution for terrestrial nitrogen.
however, there may be a caveat: the nitrogen isotopic compositions have only been measured in cometary cn and hcn, and the composition of cometary nh3, n2 (if quantitatively trapped), and refractory organic matter are not known.
(iii) chondrites.
their δ13c compositions are generally negative, with values of around 0 to -15 ‰ (table 4), which encompass the terrestrial carbon isotopic composition and, therefore, support a chondritic origin for this element.
the hydrogen and nitrogen isotope ratios of earth are best matched by the bulk ci chondrites, followed by the cms, with a small input of solar material (marty 2012; alexander et al.
2012).
there is one notable exception for a chondritic source for terrestrial volatiles, and that is the isotopic composition of atmospheric xenon.
atmospheric xenon isotopes and, to a lesser extent, krypton isotopes are enriched by 3-4 % per amu (about 1 % per amu for krypton), relative to chondritic or solar compositions.
xenon is also depleted in its elemental abundance by a factor of about 20 relative to other noble gases in the atmosphere (compared to a chondritic abundance pattern).
this fact, known as the xenon paradox, has been regarded as the result of early escape processes specific to the physical properties of xenon (pepin 1991; tolstikhin and o’nions 1994; dauphas 2003).
recently, pujol et al.
(2011) reported xenon isotopic compositions in archaean rocks that are intermediate between atmospheric and chondritic ones, and suggested a long-term, non-thermal escape of atmospheric xenon through time due to ionization by solar uv light.
it is not known whether such a process could have affected carbon at earth’s surface.
its effect might have been limited if carbon is indeed mostly sequestrated in the mantle.
the possibility of xenon loss from the atmosphere after earth’s forming events has implications for the timing of early atmospheric evolution and of earth’s formation (see below).
inferences on the nature of earth's building blocks
according to our estimate, the delivery of volatile elements, including carbon, to earth required the contribution of 1 to 3 wt.% of “wet” material, having probable affinities with ci, or possibly cm, chondrites.
by comparison, platinum group elements, which are in chondritic proportions in the mantle, require a lower contribution of about 0.3 wt.% (range: 0.1-0.8 wt.%) of chondritic material after core formation.
this difference suggests that the delivery of volatile elements was not a late veneer event and was already on-going during terrestrial differentiation.
the depletion of nitrogen in the bse (fig.
4), if due to nitrogen trapping in the core, also requires early accretion of volatiles.
this point is important for understanding the nature of the building blocks of our planet.
the ruthenium and molybdenum isotope signatures of most meteorite groups correlate (dauphas et al.
2004; burkhardt et al.
2011) and show enrichments in s-process isotopes relative to earth’s.
molybdenum is moderately siderophile, while ruthenium is highly siderophile.
thus, mantle molybdenum was predominantly accreted during the main stage of planetary growth, as were volatile elements, while the ruthenium now present in the mantle was delivered as part of a "late veneer".
thus, the respective cosmochemical reservoirs of these deliveries must have had comparable isotopic compositions during and after earth’s accretion.
while most meteorite groups show enrichments in s-process molybdenum and ruthenium isotopes relative to earth, the exceptions are the enstatite and ci (orgueil) chondrites for molybdenum and, presumably, for ruthenium, which both have terrestrial-like molybdenum isotopic patterns.
hence making earth from a cosmochemical reservoir having an enstatite-like isotope composition (which has the appropriate oxygen isotope signature) with addition of “wet” material akin to ci-like material is not only compatible with volatile element compositions, but also could have provided a way to oxidize the composition of earth.
importantly, if the volatile elements were accreted before the end of terrestrial differentiation as we argue here, a major fraction of them must have survived the moon-forming impact and other giant impacts that built early earth.
an open question of this scenario is the behavior of carbon and other volatile elements during core formation if they were delivered, not as a late veneer, but during terrestrial differentiation.
much progress is expected from experimental high-pressure, high-temperature work on volatile elements in the presence of metal and silicate.
is cosmic dust a major source of terrestrial volatiles?
micrometeorites (mms) and interplanetary dust particles (idps) are potentially important suppliers of terrestrial volatiles because: (i) the d/h distribution of mms’ values presents a frequency peak that coincides with that of terrestrial water (engrand et al.
1999); (ii) at present, their mass flux of 10,000 to 40,000 tons/yr (love and brownlee 1993; engrand and maurette 1998) exceeds by far that of meteorites (~8 tons/yr; bland et al.
1996); and (iii) “cosmic” dust may be rich in carbon (e.g., matrajt et el.
2003).
marty et al.
(2005) estimated that < 10 % atmospheric nitrogen could have been supplied by cosmic dust after earth’s building events since 4.4 ga ago, with essentially the correct nitrogen isotopic composition, based on the analysis of nitrogen in mms and using the lunar surface record of et contribution to planetary surfaces.
the impact on the carbon inventory of our planet might have been even more limited since nitrogen is apparently depleted by one order of magnitude in earth relative to carbon (fig.
4).
from a dynamical point of view, idps do not represent a plausible source for the bulk of earth’s carbon.
during planetary growth, dust is efficiently accreted by planetesimals and planetary embryos (leinhardt et al.
2009, lambrechts and johansen 2012) such that its lifetime during the main phases of planetary accretion is short.
dust is re-generated by collisions, but is swept up by larger bodies on a timescale that is short compared with the radial drift timescale (leinhardt et al 2009).
it is only after the “dust has settled” in terms of planet formation, and the density of planetesimals and surviving embryos (a.k.a., terrestrial planets) has decreased sufficiently in the inner solar system, that dust particles are able to drift over large radial distances and thus deliver volatiles such as carbon and water to earth.
these arguments would break down if the snow-/soot-line swept in to ~1 au during the last stretch of the gaseous protoplanetary disk phase (e.g., sasselov and lecar 2000), producing volatile-rich dust grains close to earth’s orbit.
however, it has not been demonstrated that such a scenario could deliver the requisite amount of volatiles to earth.
timing of volatile delivery and retention.
the time constraints for this epoch are scarce and somewhat model dependent.
inner planet bodies of the size of mars accreted in a few ma (dauphas and pourmand 2011).
it takes longer to make an earth-size planet, but how long is a matter of debate.
the 182hf-182w extinct radiochronometer permits one to explore metal-silicate differentiation of planetary bodies, given the half-life of 182hf (9 ma) and the lithophile/siderophile nature of hf/w.
earth has a different w isotope composition compared to chondrites, which allows one to set the last episode of metal-silicate differentiation, presumably the formation of the core, at 11 to 30 ma after start of solar system condensation (e.g., yin et al.
2002; kleine et al.
2002).
the final stage of core formation has been attributed by many to the moon-forming impact, after which no similarly catastrophic collisions would have taken place.
touboul et al.
(2007) have proposed a longer timeframe (60-120 ma), since they could not find any w isotopic difference between earth and moon.
they argued that, because the terrestrial and lunar mantles have different hf/w ratios, the absence of any w isotopic difference between the two bodies implies that their last major episode of differentiation (the moon-forming impact) took place after 182hf was decayed, in practice, ≥ 50 ma.
however, this assumption would not hold if earth and the moon’s mantles have a similar hf/w ratio, which could have been homogenized between the terrestrial and lunar mantles during or in the aftermaths of the moon-forming impact.
independent time constraints for earth’s formation come from the notion of atmospheric closure using the extinct radioactivity of 129i (this isotope decays to 129xe with a half life of 16 ma).
the initial abundance of 129i can be estimated from that of terrestrial iodine (the stable 127i isotope) and from the amount of 129xe in the atmosphere in excess of the stable xe isotope composition.
this mass balance yields a closure age of about 120 ma after the start of solar system formation for the atmosphere (wetherill 1975), which is also that of bulk earth since the mantle inventory of radiogenic 129xe is small compared to the atmospheric one (e.g., ozima and podosek 2002).
combining this radiochronometric system with the other relevant extinct radioactivity of 244pu (t1/2 = 82 ma) that fissions to 131-136xe yields a similar age of ~80 ma (kunz et al.
1998), since this age range is mostly determined by the decay constant of 129i.
however, if xenon has been escaping for a long period of time (pujol et al.
2011), then the closure ages have to be corrected for such loss and yield < 50 ma (range 35-50 ma) for the “age” of the atmosphere and therefore for the main episodes of volatile delivery.
such timing is more consistent with the early age of lunar formation initially proposed on the basis of w differences between chondrites and earth.
this closure age may represent the time when the earth retained quantitatively its most volatile elements.
in the context of the grand tack model (walsh et al.
2011) the accretion of volatile-rich (c-complex) material occurs mostly in the first ~50 ma of earth’s history (fig.
5).
in dynamical simulations, earth analogues accrete a total of 2 to 3% of carbon-rich material, mainly from small planetesimals, with a tail that extends beyond 100 ma (o’brien et al, 2010) in contrast, earth analogues in simulations with fixed giant planet orbits (e.g., the one in figure 2) tend to accrete far more c-complex material, typically 5 to 20% (raymond et al.
2007, 2009).
volatile delivery is not perfectly efficient.
some water is lost during accretion due to impact heating for very high-velocity impacts such as those from comets (e.g., svetsov 2007).
giant impacts may also strip a fraction of water from the growing earth (canup and pierazzo 2006), although the entire atmosphere must be completely removed by an impact before a large fraction of earth’s water can be stripped (genda and abe 2005).
however, the question of volatile retention merits additional study as only a fraction of the relevant circumstances have been carefully explored.
carbon trapping in earth
earth experienced very high temperatures during accretion, which might have peaked with the earth-moon forming event (cameron 1997; pahlevan and stevenson 2007).
under these conditions, the retention of volatile elements may have been problematic.
noble gases are inert by nature and are presently concentrated in the atmosphere.
chemically reactive volatiles, such as carbon, nitrogen, and water, are able to change their speciation and solubilities depending on redox conditions: at low fo2 (below iw) carbon, nitrogen, and hydrogen solubilities in silicates increase drastically (e.g., kadik et al.
2011), suggesting that significant amounts of these elements could have been retained in a magma ocean under reducing conditions.
from dynamical simulations, contributions from wet planetesimals akin to carbonaceous chondrites are a natural consequence of the evolution of the inner solar system.
such contributions are not likely to have occurred before the late phases of the gaseous protoplanetary disk phase, and more likely towards the last stages of terrestrial accretion, starting after a few ma and lasting for several tens of ma.
at that time, the size of earth was likely to have exceeded half of its present size, and in-falling wet planetesimals were quantitatively degassing upon impact (lange and ahrens 1982, 1986), generating a co2-rich steam atmosphere and probably local episodes of intense magmatism.
because the solubility of co2 is low in molten silicates, only a small fraction of impact-generated co2 could have been trapped in silicates by equilibrium dissolution, and other means of sequestering carbon in the mantle need to be found.
at this stage of earth formation, it is unlikely that reducing conditions below iw could have persisted for long intervals of time, particularly because in-falling bodies were oxidized, and the placing of significant amounts of carbon into reduced phases, such as graphite or diamond, was unlikely.
the problem of trapping co2 from a steam atmosphere into earth has been addressed by sleep et al.
(2001).
after the moon-forming impact, earth’s surface evolved towards a co2-rich steam atmosphere overlying liquid water in a geologically short period of time (few ma) due to the bombardment by remnant planetesimals both wet and dry (see fig.
5).
an upper limit for the co2 partial pressure is taken to be the one corresponding to all terrestrial carbon being in the atmosphere in the form of co2.
the atmospheric pressure of co2 corresponding to a carbon inventory of 2.5 x 1022 moles (zhang and zindler 1993) is 21.5 mpa (215 bar), or ~0.2 gpa (2 kbar) if one uses total bulk earth carbon content estimated by marty (2012; 2.6 x 1023 moles).
the actual co2 partial pressure could have been much less.
impacts of volatile-rich bodies could have continued for 107 to 108 years, while transfer of co2 from the atmosphere and into the mantle may have occurred on a time scale of ~1 ma or less, corresponding to the duration of a magma ocean episode induced by a large impact (sleep et al.
2001).
for illustration, if impactors all had sizes of 100 km, a typical size for primordial asteroids, ~20,000 of them with 3 to 4 % carbon would have supplied the required 2 wt.% of earth’s mass to supply terrestrial volatiles.
over 30 ma, this effect would have led to an average co2 partial pressure of only about 100 bars.
in these conditions, most water would have been liquid, with a h2o water pressure of only a few bars.
based on analogies with present-day mid-ocean ridge systems, sleep et al.
(2001) have argued that atmospheric co2 precipitated as carbonates in the basaltic crust through hydrothermal circulation.
because of the hotter thermal regime of earth, convection was much faster and the magmas were less sluggish, resulting in efficient hydrothermal trapping of carbon in the newly created crust.
foundering of crustal blocks would then transfer carbon into the mantle.
part of “subducted” carbon would then be stored at great depth, escaping recirculation to the surface and degassing.
it is possible that, due to the pressure dependence of oxygen fugacity, such recycled carbon could then have been sequestrated in high-pressure phases.
a critical unknown for this model is the efficiency of transfer into the mantle, since a hotter regime may also favor degassing of foundering blocks by analogy with modern hot subduction zones.
another crucial question is whether the subducted carbon could escape shallow convection and be transferred deeper into the mantle.
according to sleep et al.
(2001), co2 trapping in the oceanic crust and transfer to the mantle would have to have been efficient in order for the temperature at earth’s surface to allow liquid water to be stable in on the order of 106 to 108 years, allowing perhaps the development of biological activity in the 50 to 100°c temperature range.
several areas of research that to be explored, such as the speciation of carbonates during their transfer into the mantle and the possible existence of carbon-rich fluids in the mantle lasting from this epoch, the direct injection at mantle depth of carbon-rich material during impacts, and the fact that all carbon present in earth was probably not at the surface at the same time.
we are only opening the magic book of earth’s formation and early evolution.
tables
table 1.
the principal nucleosynthetic formation reactions and sources of the isotopes of hydrogen, carbon and nitrogen.
table 2.
the abundances (wt.%) of hydrogen, carbon, and nitrogen in various reservoirs and objects.
table 3.
key isotopic ratios for hydrogen, carbon and nitrogen in various objects.
table 4.
the range of abundances and isotopic compositions of carbon in bulk and in the directly determined major components—insoluble organic material (iom) and carbonates (carb)—in the main chondrite groups.
shock-heated meteorites were not included in the calculation of the  ranges.
tagish lake is a carbonaceous chondrite that has affinities with the cm and ci chondrites, and fell on january 18th, 2000.
figure captions
figure 1.
stable isotope (h, n) variations among solar system objects and reservoirs (adapted from marty, 2012; data sources therein).
figure 2.
six snapshots in time of the orbital configuration of a simulation of late-stage terrestrial accretion from raymond et al.
(2006).
the size of each body is proportional to its relative physical size and scales as its mass1/3.
jupiter was also included in the simulation on a circular orbit at 5.5 au (not shown in plot).
the color of each particle corresponds to its water content: particles inside 2 au started the simulation dry, particles that started from 2 to 2.5 au have 0.1% water by mass, and particles that started beyond 2.5 au have 5% water by mass; during collisions the water mass fraction is a calculated using a simple mass balance.
in this particular simulation three terrestrial planets formed, as did a few particles trapped in the asteroid belt.
the two inner planets are reasonably good venus and earth analogues in terms of their masses and orbits, but the outer planet is roughly nine times more massive than the real mars.
the earth analogue in this simulation accreted a large volume of water of roughly ten times earth's current water budget, although water loss during impacts was not accounted for.
recall that we expect carbon delivery to earth to have followed the same dynamical pathway as water delivery.
figure 3.
snapshots in time of a simulation that represents the grand tack model (walsh et al.
2011).
the simulation starts with three parts: (i) an inner disk of planetary embryos (open circles) and dry (red) planetesimals; (ii) a fully-formed jupiter at 3.5 au and saturn’s core trapped in 2:3 resonance (large black dots); and (iii) a pristine outer disk of water-rich planetesimals.
jupiter and saturn migrate inward together while saturn continues to grow by accreting gas from the disk.
once saturn reaches its final mass the two planets’ migration reverses direction and they migrate outward until the disk dissipates and leaves them stranded at 5.4 and 7.1 au.
(see walsh et al.
2011 for a discussion of plausible orbital histories of jupiter and saturn).
the inner disk is truncated at 1 au and the terrestrial planets that formed are similar to the actual ones, including mars.
water and carbon are delivered to earth in the form of outer disk planetesimals that “overshoot” the asteroid belt as the are scattered inward by jupiter during the giant planets’ outward migration.
they can be seen in the 300 and 500 kyr panels as the blue symbols at low semi-major axis and generally high eccentricity.
figure 4.
normalized abundance of volatile elements in bulk earth (data from marty 2012).
each volatile molar abundance is divided by the mass of earth (5.97 x 1027 g) and normalized by the corresponding content in ci-cm chondrites.
note that the terrestrial abundance pattern is close to chondritic and corresponds to the contribution of ~2 ± 1 % carbonaceous chondrite material.
such contribution is in excess of the “late veneer” one, corresponding to the amount of highly siderophile elements in the mantle.
figure 5.
volatile delivery to earth analogues in simulations of terrestrial planet formation in the context of the grand tack model.
earth analogues are defined here simply as simulated planets with masses of 0.7 to 1.3 earth masses and orbital semi-major axes between 0.8 and 1.25.
the plot shows the fraction of “wet” (carbon-rich c-complex) material accreted onto each simulated planet as a function of time.
each earth analogue accreted 2-3% of c-complex material in the form of planetesimals that were scattered inward during jupiter and saturn’s early outward migration but that were accreted on a much longer timescale of tens to 100 ma.
