PREFACE
CARBON IN EARTH is an outgrowth of the Deep Carbon Observatory (DCO), a 10-year international research effort dedicated to achieving transformational understanding of the chemical and biological roles of carbon in Earth  series as a benchmark for our present understanding of Earth’s carbon—both what we know and what we have yet to learn.
Our ambition is to produce a second, companion volume to mark the progress of this decadal initiative.
This volume addresses a range of questions that were articulated in  at the First Deep Carbon Cycle Workshop in Washington, DC.
At that meeting 110 scientists from a dozen countries set forth the state of knowledge about Earth’s carbon.
They also debated the key opportunities and top objectives facing the community.
Subsequent deep carbon meetings in Bejing,  Novosibirsk,  and Washington,  as well as more than a dozen smaller workshops, expanded and refined the DCO’s decadal goals.
The 19 chapters that follow elaborate on those opportunities and objectives.
A striking characteristic of CARBON IN EARTH is the multidisciplinary scientific approach necessary to encompass this topic.
The following chapters address such diverse aspects as the fundamental physics and chemistry of carbon at extreme conditions, the possible character of deep-Earth carbon-bearing minerals, the geodynamics of Earth’s large-scale fluid fluxes, tectonic implications of diamond inclusions, geosynthesis of organic molecules and the origins of life, the changing carbon cycle through deep time, and the vast subsurface microbial biosphere (including the hidden deep viriosphere).
Accordingly, the collective authorship of CARBON IN EARTH represents laboratory, field, and theoretical researchers from the full range of physical and biological sciences.
A hallmark of the DCO is our desire to implement advanced strategies in communications, data management, engagement, and visualization.
Accordingly, this volume incorporates some novel aspects.
Thanks to sponsorship by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, which continues to provide significant support for the DCO, this is the first of the RiMG series to be published as an open access volume.
We have thus been able to focus on the electronic publication to incorporate a number of novel features, including hyperlinks to websites and databases, video and animations, and direct links to many references.
This effort has benefitted immeasurably from the contributions of numerous individuals.
In particular we are grateful to Jesse Ausubel and his colleagues at the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for generous support in the production and publication of this open access volume.
We thank the many reviewers, who have greatly enhanced each chapter.
We are especially grateful to Jodi Rosso and the editorial staff of the Mineralogical Society of America for their continuing efforts to produce this extraordinary RiMG series.
