Carbonate melts and carbonatites
INTRODUCTION
Carbonatites are familiar to students of petrology as rare igneous rocks formed
predominantly of carbonate, whose only modern expression is a single active volcano that
erupts strongly alkaline carbonate lavas with no direct match in Earth’s geological record.
Based on their Sr-Nd-Pb isotopic data, stable isotopic compositions, noble gases, and
experimental phase equilibria, they are derived from the mantle, showing almost no sign of
contamination by the crust.
As liquids, carbonate melts have remarkable physical properties, which set them apart
from the alkaline silicate melts with which they are often temporally associated.
They show
very high solubilities of many elements considered rare in silicate magmas, and they have
the highest known melt capacities for dissolving water and other volatile species like
halogens at crustal pressures.
They are highly efficient transport agents of carbon from the
mantle to the crust, remaining mobile over extraordinary ranges of temperature, and their
very low viscosity should enhance connectivity along grain boundaries in the mantle where
they are implicated in geochemical enrichment processes related to metasomatism.
2
Most carbonatites have unambiguous origins in the mantle and the limit to their depth is
not known, but the likelihood that they may exist in the lower mantle (
2012; ) needs to be appraised since they may exert a fundamental control
on the mobility and long-term storage of deep carbon in Earth.
Ultimately the stability of
carbonate melt is an extension of the stability of carbonate minerals (a,
2013b) subject critically to the mantle oxidation state ( Frost and McCammon
2008); carbonate-melts have also been predicted in the oceanic low-velocity zone and deep
mantle  by laboratory petrology
experiments .
Much remains to be discovered about carbonate melts at very
high-pressures.
Beyond the current solid media experiments with piston cylinder, multi-anvil press, and
diamond-anvil cell (e.g.
calcite-dolomite-aragonite; ), we may look to
carbonate inclusions in diamonds (  2009; 
) and high-pressure shock wave environments for clues, including shocked
carbonate from impact craters, which can show isotopic shifts (δ13C vary 5 per mil; Martinez
et al.
1994, 1995; a).
Another unique property of carbonate melts is their
high electrical conductivity—up to three orders of magnitude greater than silicate melts and
five orders of magnitude higher than hydrated mantle material (see carbonatite
occurrences).
Consequently, carbonate melts have been invoked to explain deep regions of
the mantle asthenosphere characterised by anomalous conductivity.
The presence of low
volume (0.1 %) carbonate melts are contenders to explain electrically conductive mantle
regions, previously thought to be caused by silicate melts or water-bearing olivine (Gaillard
et al.
2008).
3
Several books and reviews have been written about the systematic geochemistry and
mineralogy and origin of carbonatites (  
   
).
Fundamental understanding of carbonatites was largely achieved in the
last century when engineering developments in technology enabled experimental petrology
to unlock the secrets of how carbonatites actually form, including their important
connections with water, enabling early formative predictions about the stability of carbonate
minerals in the upper mantle; the significance of free CO2 and H2O in the mantle transition
zone; the derivation of kimberlitic and carbonatitic melts; and mantle metasomatism (Wyllie
and  1962; ).
The purpose of this review is to provide a
framework for understanding carbonate melts, to highlight their potential role in providing
vertical connectivity and pathways for deep carbon to be transferred from the mantle to
Earth’s surface, and to illustrate how further technological advances are still required to
answer even the most basic questions about the abundance and mobility of carbon in Earth’s
deep interior.
CARBONATE MELTS
Physical properties
Very low magmatic temperatures and very low viscosity are striking features of alkalicarbonatite
lavas at low pressure, for example at the sole active volcano Oldoinyo Lengai in
Tanzania (  
).
The low carbonate melt viscosity was first measured accurately in
experiments using in-situ synchrotron radiation to track rapidly falling spheres (Dobson et al.
4
1996) and is compared with other data ( a) in  We note
that only natural high PT iron-rich melts in Earth’s core may approach such extremely low
viscosities .
Calculated physical properties by Genge et al.
(1995b) predict that CaCO3 melt densities
increase from 2000 kg m-3 at P = 0.1 GPa to 2900 kg m-3 at P = 10.0 GPa, suggesting
carbonate melts are significantly more compressible than silicate melts.
Estimates of the
constant pressure heat capacity of 1.65-1.90 J g-1 K-1, isothermal compressibilities of 0.012-
0.01 x 10-10 Pa-1 and thermal expansivities of 1.886-0.589 x 10-4 K-1 were also calculated
(b).
Self-diffusion coefficients qualitatively suggest that CaCO3 melts have
very low viscosities at high-pressures to 11 GPa.
Although no other atomic simulations of carbonate melts have been performed, quantum
mechanical ab initio evolutionary models, which allow the most energetically stable atomic
structures to be predicted, suggest that radical transformation of carbonate mineral structures
occur at lower mantle pressures ( 2013).
Simulations predict that the
stable MgCO3 and CaCO3 phases at pressures >82 GPa and >19 GPa respectively are
dominated by corner-sharing CO4 tetrahedra networks, with those of CaCO3 adopting a β-
cristobalite structure, and MgCO3 adopting a pyroxene-like structure at pressures >110 GPa.
Such predictions are supported experimentally by recovered Mg-Fe carbonates with
polymerized structures .
The formation of CO4
4- at high-pressure was
predicted  because it is compatible with the similar electronic configurations of
C and Si, which satisfy the requirements of both sp2 (trigonal) and sp3 (tetrahedral)
hybridization.
Transformation from carbonate structures to tetrahedral CO4 groups, however,
requires the breaking of pp bonds and the formation of antibonding orbitals and is likely to
5
be associated with significant activation energy.
Metastable carbonate phases, therefore, are
likely to be present across the transition region of the mantle at which such transformations
occur.
Indeed ab initio models predict that numerous energetically similar metastable phases
exist for MgCO3 .
Atomic structure of carbonate melts
The atomic structures of carbonate melts have been little studied in comparison to the
structure of silicate melts, but are fundamental in controlling their physical and chemical
behavior in natural systems.
Carbonate melts are ionic liquids consisting of carbonate CO3
2-
molecular anions and metal cations that interact principally due to coulombic interactions
and are thus very different from silicate melts, which have network structures characterized
by polymerization .
Ionic carbonate melts have been considered to be
structureless with no definite association between metal cations and carbonate molecules
.
However the combined evidence from phase relations of
carbonates, the solubility of metals in carbonate liquids, and the spectroscopy of carbonate
glasses and atomic simulations, suggests that carbonate liquids have structure at scales larger
than their component molecular groups.
Carbonate melts as ionic liquids
The ionic nature of carbonate melts and their inability to polymerize to form network
structures is their most fundamental property and is a consequence of the electronic structure
and intra-molecular bonding of the carbonate ion.
Consideration of the electronic structure of
Si4+ and C4+ demonstrates that the outer shells of both atoms have identical electron
6
occupation, that is, Si4+ (3s23p2) and C4+ (2s22p2), and hence similar bonding characteristics
might be expected.
However, the differing electronegativities of Si and C, 1.9 and 2.6
respectively , result in Si-O bonds that are less polarized than C-O bonds,
with a 50% ionic character and localized charge distribution on oxygen atoms.
The small
ionic radius Si4+ of 0.34 dictates tetrahedral coordination with oxygen, Si4+ readily adopts
sp3 hybrid covalent bonds, whereas C4+ is less restricted by the requirements of close
packing and adopts an sp2 hybridization in order to reduce columbic interaction of the
oxygen atoms.
In both C4+ and Si4+ the adoption of hybrid bonding orbitals is facilitated by
excitation of an electron from an s orbital to occupy an empty p orbital.
A consequence of
the sp2 hybridization of the carbonate ion is the formation of sp2s bonds between C and O
and the formation of two pp bonds (Figure 1) above and below the plane of the molecule by
interaction of C and O p-orbitals.
Not only does the presence of a pp bond result in a double
bond, shared over the three C-O bonds, but it also leaves only lone pair p orbital per oxygen
orientated in the plane of the molecule.
Hence, unlike SiO4
4- tetrahedra, the CO3
2- trigonal
group has no unpaired orbitals available for covalent bonding, and is hence, unable to
polymerize.
Cation electronegativity (χ)
The dissociation temperatures of crystalline unary carbonates indicate that metal cations
exert an important control on carbonate melt structure since they control the stability of the
carbonate ion.
Carbonate dissociation temperatures decrease with increasing
electronegativity (χ) of the metal cation for any particular polytype (Figure 2; ).
Since χ relates to the ability of an atom to attract electrons, the variation in dissociation
7
temperatures of crystalline carbonates with χ suggests that intra-molecular bond strengths
are moderated by charge delocalization on CO3
2- molecules due to the influence of nearby
metal cations.
Similar control by metal composition on CO3
2- intra-molecular bond strengths
within carbonate melts will be an important control on dissociation reactions that determine
the abundance of carbonate ions available for complexation with metal cations (Genge
1994).
Different dissociation temperature-χ trends are observed for carbonates with different
structures.
Aragonite structure carbonates with 8-fold coordinated metal cations have higher
dissociation temperatures than 6-fold coordinated calcite structure carbonates.
The
dependence of C-O bond strength on metal cation site coordination suggests that carbonate
melt structure is likely to be as important in the dissociation of carbonate ions as
composition.
Transition metal carbonates have higher dissociation temperatures than
predicted by χ of their metal cations, indicating that delocalization of intra-molecular
bonding electrons is not the only control on carbonate dissociation (Figure 2).
Transition
metals, however, are capable of coordinate bonding with carbonate ions, utilizing the lone
pair orbitals of the carbonate ion to donate electrons to empty metal ligands.
Coordinate
bonding results in charge redistribution that will reduce delocalization of electrons from
carbonate ion molecular orbitals, resulting in increased bond strengths and greater carbonate
stability.
Carbonate ion dissociation is thus very important in the nature of speciation of
components within carbonate melts.
Speciation
8
The solubility of metal oxides in carbonate melts can provide constraints on carbonate
melt structure, and several studies have been performed on alkali carbonates at atmospheric
pressure for use in molten carbonate fuel cells (MCFCs) focused on transition
elements/oxides like NiO ( 1989) and alkaline earth metal ceramics
.
Solubility experiments for transition and alkaline earths in alkaline
carbonate melts show solution as basic oxides or acid carbonate complexes (Figure 3).
Basic
dissolution occurs at low abundances of the added metal oxide whilst carbonate dissolution
is dominant at higher abundances.
Illustrative reaction mechanisms for dissolution of NiO
are shown below:
Basic
NiO + O2- = NiO2
2-
NiO + CO3
2- = NiO2
2- + CO2
Acid
NiO + CO3
2- = NiCO3 + O2-
NiO + 2CO3
2- = Ni(CO3)2- + O2-
Further details of speciation related to dissolution mechanisms in alkaline carbonate melts
like Na2CO3 are provided by  while  show that
dependence on carbonate activity within the melt, oxygen fugacity, and partial pressure of
CO2 will also be important factors in controlling the speciation of metals.
Orfield and Shore
(1989) report experimentally derived NiO solubility in binary Na2CO3-K2CO3 melts, which
exhibits significant divergences from ideal mixing behavior, and they provide additional data
for Rb2CO3 and K2CO3 melts (Figure.
3).
9
Studies of MCFCs show that water can influence carbonate melt structure through
coupled reactions with carbonate ions  with a wide range of possible
reactions prevalent under different oxygen fugacity and partial pressure of CO2:
CO3
2- + H2O = CO2 + 2OHOH-
+ CO2 = CO3
2- + H+
3H2 + CO = CH4 + H2O
The solubility of species in competition with CO3
2- for metal cations, for example P, which
in silicate melts is stabilized by divalent cations  or OH- are likely to
decrease with increasing metal-carbonate complexation.
Experimental studies on P solubility
in CaCO3 melts  demonstrate that solubility is reduced with
increasing partial pressure of CO2 and decreasing temperature, consistent with increased
formation of metal-carbonate associations in the melt (b).
The solubility of
cations and molecular species within carbonate melts imply that these are present either as
complexes with carbonate ions or as oxide and hydrate complexes, but the solubility data do
not provide constraints on the sites or degree of order of these structural components.
Carbonate glasses
Two carbonate melt systems are known to quench to glasses at 0.1 GPa under laboratory
conditions: (1) MgCO3-K2CO3  and (2) La(OH)3-
Ca(OH)2-CaCO3-CaF2-BaSO4  and provide a means of investigating
melt structure directly by spectroscopy.
The phase relations of both systems are shown in
(Figure 4).
Glass is a supercooled liquid and forms by cooling through the glass transition, a
second order phase transition during which the translational and vibrational motions of
10
molecular groups become restricted.
Crucial in the formation of glasses is their failure to
crystallize during cooling below the liquidus/solidus; thus high viscosity melts and those
with low melting temperatures are most likely to form glasses due to the dependence of both
crystallization and nucleation on diffusion .
The majority of glasses,
therefore, form from melts with network structures, such as silicate melts, in which
covalently bonded polymers resist rearrangement.
Although both carbonate systems that
form glass have low eutectic temperatures, they are likely to have low melt viscosities
.
Glass formation in these systems is also not restricted only to low
temperature melts.
The formation of these carbonate glasses from ionic liquids is, therefore,
anomalous and implies that an extended structural association occurs between molecular
component groups.
Infrared and Raman spectra of carbonate glasses (a)
indicate at least two structural populations of CO3
2- (Figure 5, Table 2); one vibrational
frequency like common 6-fold coordinated carbonate, and a highly asymmetric site with
large vibrational splitting of its v3 mode.
The existence of two general structural populations
of carbonate ion in the glasses may correspond to a flexible pseudo-network structure where
alkaline earth elements (Ca and Mg) act as bridging cations linking carbonate groups by
ionic bonds and having similar coordination to equivalent crystalline carbonates, whilst other
components, such as K, act as network modifiers that support ring-structures within the
flexible network (b).
The structure of carbonate melts is, therefore,
envisaged as a network of metal-carbonate complexes held open by modifying species.
In
this context asymmetric carbonate sites were suggested to represent carbonate ions with nonbridging
oxygen atoms without first neighbor bridging cations.
11
The spectral activity of the O-H stretching region within hydrous La-bearing glasses
furthermore suggests that water exists both as molecular H2O and OH, interacting variably
with carbonate ions and as metal complexes occupying relatively high symmetry sites in
these glasses.
The presence of bicarbonate groups, however, is prohibited by the absence of
their characteristic O-H stretching frequencies.
The absence of a molecular CO2 v3 stretching
mode from the infrared spectra of both carbonate glasses suggests, by comparison with IR
spectra for silicate melts  very low concentrations of CO2 in
carbonate melts.
In summary, IR and Raman spectroscopy of carbonate glasses, implies that
for these restricted compositions, the carbonate melt structure comprises metal-carbonate
complexes where a transient pseudo-network of ring structures with interstitial spaces
occupied by modifying species and molecular groups (b).
Atomic simulation of carbonates
Molecular dynamics simulations (MDS) of CaCO3 from atmospheric pressure to 11.5
GPa (b) suggest that CaCO3 melts have the closest similarity to calcite
structures, rather than aragonite, with similar bond lengths (Table 3) and broadly 6-fold Ca
coordination (Table 4).
The presence of second-nearest neighbor peaks, however, in
particular for Ca-O and C-C suggest a degree of medium-range order consistent with
associative metal-carbonate complexes (Figure 6).
Snap-shots of melt structure (Figure 7)
indicate the occurrence of local density fluctuations, relating to spatial associations of
carbonate groups and metal cations.
The results of atomic simulations of CaCO3 liquids are,
therefore, broadly compatible with the implications of infra-red studies of carbonate glasses
12
since they exhibit carbonate ions linked into a flexible network by ionic bonding to metal
cations.
CARBONATITES
Understanding the geological context of carbonatites observed as volcanic products and
magmatic rocks now at Earth’s surface should not only consider their connections with other
families of carbon-bearing igneous rocks like nephelinites, melilitites, and kimberlites, but
also the direct evidence provided by experiments on their synthetic counterparts as carbonate
melts.
This section summarizes the current status of carbonatites.
Carbonatites are commonly defined as magmatic rocks with high modal abundance of
carbonate minerals (>50 wt.%) and geochemistry typified by high abundances of Sr, Ba, P
and the light rare-earth elements (LREE) .
They have been subdivided
(Figure 8) on the basis of their dominant modal carbonate mineral, such as calcite-, or
dolomite-carbonatites and on their corresponding major element geochemistry with Mg-, Ca-
, Fe- and REE-carbonatites ( Le  ).
In
parallel, a process-related classification would divide them into two groups: primary
carbonatites and carbothermal residua .
In this scheme, primary carbonatites
can be further divided into groups of magmatic carbonatites associated with nephelinite,
melilitite, kimberlite, and specific mantle-derived silicate magmas, formed by partial
melting, whereas carbothermal residua carbonatites form as low-temperature fluids rich in
CO2, H2O, and fluorine.
Occurrence of carbonatites
13
Tectonic setting of carbonatites: Primarily, carbonatites are located within stable, intraplate
settings, over half of which are in Africa, often occurring in peripheral regions to
orogenic belts showing an apparent link to orogenic events or plate separation (Garson et al.
1984; Le   ).
Carbonatite concentrations are also
associated with topographic swells up to 1000 km across (Le  Srivastava et al.
1995).
The occurrence of carbonatites in continental crust has perpetuated interpretation of
their geochemistry in terms of a genetic connection  and they
have also been variously related to mantle plumes and large igneous provinces (LIPs); for
thematic reviews see .
A recent survey of the most complete world
database shows striking lithological control with repeated activation of old carbonatites in
Archaean-aged crust.
This distribution precludes a direct link with mantle plumes and favors
a fundamental link to the same underlying mantle source of carbon, which manifests in
kimberlites .
The surface manifestation of carbonatites may belie
their distribution in the underlying mantle, where some of their extreme physical properties,
such as very high conductivity (Figure 9) make them sensitive to remote geophysical testing
.
Understanding their deep origins must explain the growing number of
carbonatites reported from unconventional tectonic associations, i.e.
not continental rifts, but
including oceanic islands, ophiolites, shear zones, deep subduction zones (
 a;   Nasir
2011) and even connections to ultra-high pressure (UHP) metamorphic terranes (Attoh and
).
Carbonatites overlying oceanic lithosphere are rare ( a,
1993b;  ), but discovery of carbonatite melt as
14
interstitial pockets within dunite xenoliths from the Kerguelen Archipelago (Moine et al.
2004b) indicates that oceanic carbonatites may be more widespread.
Geographical areas of
carbonatitic activity are often very long-lived and, where unrelated to the migration of
mantle plumes, a direct relationship with underlying lithosphere is likely (
), yet others are thought to be related to deep mantle plumes, for
example Kola Peninsula , Canary Islands , Cape
Verde Islands , Brazil , Deccan Traps (Simonetti et al.
1998), and Greenland .
New regions with carbonatites are still being
discovered, for example in the Middle East including Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates,
and ophiolite-related carbonatite in Oman .
A remarkable series of books
dedicated to reviewing the systematic geographical distribution with individual maps of all
carbonatites sourced from thousands of references, is provided by Woolley and has been
used to publish a comprehensive global map and database of all known carbonatites
.
Temporal distribution of carbonatites.
Globally from just 56 known in 1987 (Figure 10),
there are now ~527 carbonatite occurrences, of which 49 are extrusive, ranging in age from
Archaean to present ( a).
The most
commonly reported oldest dated carbonatite and associated silicate rocks are from
Phalaborwa carbonatite in South Africa at 2063 to 2013 Ma  and
Siilinjarvi, Finland circa 2047 million years old ( Woolley and Kempe
1989).
The Siilinjarvi age is typical, and based upon K-Ar dates of 1790±30 to 2030±30 Ma
on phlogopite, 2530±45 Ma on richterite, and 2260±42 Ma on actinolite ,
15
as well as 1850±40 Ma and 2280±40 Ma on phlogopite and richterite respectively from the
main carbonatite.
However, older ages are also discussed for Siilinjarvi, with reports of U-Pb
dating of zircon from sövite indicating an age of 2580±200 Ma  along
with unpublished Sm-Nd data supporting an age of 2600 Ma .
Of the known extrusive carbonatites, 41 are calcio-carbonatites, 7 are dolomitic
carbonatites, and only one extrusive carbonatite is alkaline natrocarbonatite (Woolley and
).
Carbonatites tend not to occur as single rock units but rather as a suite in
association with alkaline silicate rocks, including a wide variety of ultramafic to felsic
silicate igneous rocks from dunites to syenites, as in the Siberian Massif (
 ), with only ~20% of carbonatites occurring
without associated silicate rocks .
Despite the occurrence of carbonatites throughout the majority of geological periods since
the Archean, their increase in frequency with decreasing age, and episodic clustering of
activity, has lead to the suggestion that conditions required for carbonatite formation are
becoming more widespread .
Alternatively  argue that the
apparent increase is a preservation artefact, with crustal erosion and preferential recycling of
orogenic-related carbonatites, with a geodynamic half-life of carbonatite bodies close to
~445 Myr.
Carbonatite rocks (orogenic and anorogenic) are relatively easily weathered in
comparison to silicate rocks, so bias towards young ages in the geological record might be
expected.
However the argument for carbonatite age bias due to preservation presented by
 has been further debated through the consideration that cratonic material
in which carbonatites are concentrated and not readily subducted; therefore, the backward
projection through Precambrian time of the modern pace of recycling by subduction is not
16
valid.
Instead,  argue that the concentration of carbonatite
material in late Archean cratonic regions is the result of re-opening and use of pre-existing
lesions during plate movements.
This activity is thought to occur in episodes, with some
areas showing up to five events, with gaps of millions of years between episodes.
Geochemistry of carbonatites
Carbonatites occur as intrusive, extrusive and hydrothermal or replacement bodies that
contain more than 50 volume percent primary igneous carbonate minerals derived from
carbonate magma  and with less than 20% SiO2 (Le ).
A
summary classification is provided in Table 5 ( Le ).
The category of REE-carbonatites have no formal definition, and they can be associated with
variable Ca:Mg:Fe carbonatites and widely varying grain sizes and textures from finegrained
(Bayan Obo, Inner Mongolia, China), to pegmatitic (Kangankunde, Malawi), and
porphyritic (Mountain Pass, California).
Their modal REE-minerals may contribute notable
colors in hand specimen either yellow, caused by bastnasite, synchisite, and REEfluocarbonates,
or vivid green, caused by monazite and REE phosphates (Wall and Mariano
1996).
We suggest a whole-rock value of >1% RE2O3 as a working definition of REE
carbonatite.
Higher values (>5%) have been used by some mining geologists ;
however, these deposits are often also rich in iron and thus have been termed
ferrocarbonatite.
The field relations of REE carbonatites and their association with elevated
Th and U suggest primary mechanisms of crystal fractionation of carbonatite magma
associated with secondary enrichment by volatile-rich metasomatic fluids (Le Bas et al.
2007; ), although relationships with alkaline silicate rocks may need further
17
study as in the case of Mountain Pass .
Their residual magmatic nature is
supported by experiments in mixed Ca-Ba-Sr-REE carbonate systems, which show the
persistence of melts at low crustal pressures to very low-temperatures (Jones and Wyllie
1983, 1986; ).
Major element signatures: Carbonatites have high abundances of Sr, Ba, P, and light rare
earth elements (LREEs), often > 3 orders of magnitude higher than those of chondritic
meteorites or bulk Earth, and show a negative Zr and Hf anomaly .
Their
chemical composition makes them powerful chemical probes for understanding the mantle,
because the effects of crustal contamination are minimized.
The average chemical
compositions for carbonatite  show that concentrations of Si, Ti, Mn, Ba, Fe, and
F increase through the series calciocarbonatites – magnesiocarbonatites – ferrocarbonatites,
but this sequence is unlikely to represent a simple crystal fractionation series (Gaspar and
 Le ).
Al, Na, K, Sr, and P are variable throughout the carbonatite
divisions (Table 6), with the exception of natrocarbonatite, which is dominated by Na2O and
K2O.
Natrocarbonatite contains up to ~40 weight percent (Na2O+K2O) with very low SiO2,
TiO2, and Al2O3, high amounts of CaO and CO2, and considerable BaO, SrO, P2O5, SO3, Cl,
F, and MnO in comparison to silicate igneous rocks .
Natrocarbonatite lavas erupted during the last ~50 years (especially in 1960-1966, 1988-
1993, and 2006-2008) have similar compositions and their detailed geology and regional
context are comprehensively reviewed in a monograph by .
18
Trace elements: Several “trace” elements achieve major levels in carbonatites.
Steep light
rare-earth element (LREE)-enriched patterns are typical (Figure 11) and can occur as modal
REE-minerals attractive for economic mining.
Through the series of carbonatites from
magnesiocarbonatites and calciocarbonatites to ferrocarbonatites, trace elements such as Co,
Cr, Ni, and V decrease whereas the REE are most abundant in ferrocarbonatites and REEcarbonatites,
often accompanied by U and Th.
Few experiments have determined
quantitative element partitioning in carbonate melts, but data exist for Zr, REE, and P (Jones
and  1986;  b; Klemme and Meyer
2003;   ).
Natrocarbonatite lava
contains high concentrations of LREEs with La/Yb and U/Th ratios being amongst the
highest of all terrestrial lavas ( and references therein).
Local chemical variations occur within the natrocarbonatites, with aphyric, phenocrystpoor
lavas having a more fractionated pattern with enrichments in Mn, Mg, Fe, V, Ba, Rb,
Nb, Y, and several volatile species in comparison to phenocryst-rich lavas and water
contents are low .
natrocarbonatite lavas of Oldoinyo
Lengai in Tanzania are particularly enriched in Ba, Cs, K, Mo, U, and LREEs relative to
primitive mantle with slight variation between the lava types, i.e.
spheroid-free or spheroidbearing
.
Natrocarbonatite lava can have Ba/Sr > 0.7, which is the
inverse to most primary calcite carbonatites, and Au contents are anomalously higher than
continental crust.
Natrocarbonatite also occurs as quenched melt in pyroclastic eruptions
typified by proximal lapilli beds and tuffs  and natrocarbonatite
tephra may have occurred at other volcanoes in the East African Rift, although there is
19
controversy about whether such ash extends to the area of early hominid footprints at Laetoli
.
Carbonatite mineral deposits
Carbonatites contain minerals enriched in several key elements of immense economic
interest, which include the REE (“strategic metals”) niobium, uranium, and tantalum, and to
a lesser extent, iron, copper, phosphorus, fluorite, barite, platinum group elements, silver,
and gold .
Political and economic
aspects of their sustainability as producers of REE have recently been re-evaluated (Franks
2011) and currently hinge on large-scale REE carbonatite mineralization of the large Bayan
Obo deposit in China (Le  2007;  Yang et al.
2011), with high prices driving resource exploration in some countries such as Malawai (e.g.
Kangankunde, AR Woolley, personal communication 2012).
Carbonatites have been
considered to host the majority of the world’s niobium, with up to 10% of the western
world’s niobium once sourced from Niobec mine in the Oka carbonatite, Quebec (Scales
1989), where extreme compositional variation of pyrochlore group minerals may have been
caused by magma mixing .
Table 7 shows data for significant carbonatite mineral deposits showing their potential,
including estimated reserves and grades, chemical affinity and mineralogy, for both primary
magmatic and secondary metasomatic deposits .
Secondary
enrichment is often a result of remobilization of Nb and REEs by hydrothermal or
carbothermal fluids enriched in F and CO2 (Le   Fan et
al.
2005).
The REE-enriched nature of carbonatites has been linked to the preferential
20
transport of REE by molecular CO3 complexes in the melt during immiscible separation
between coexisting silicate and carbonate melts, resulting in an increased La/Lu ratio in the
carbonatite relative to silicate melt .
Isotopic signatures of carbonatites
Radiogenic isotope ratios: Although carbonatites are volumetrically insignificant
compared with silicate igneous rocks, their widespread distribution on most continents
coupled with their variation in age provides constraints on the evolution of the subcontinental
mantle through time.
Young carbonatites share significant isotopic similarities
with young oceanic island basalts (OIB; ).
Thus, alkaline silicate
magmas and carbonatites in the important East African Rift, including the active carbonatite
volcano Oldoinyo Lengai, lie close to the mixing line HIMU-EM1 (Figure 12) identified in
OIB.
This mixing may represent either a lithospheric or a deeper mantle sub-lithospheric
signature related to a mantle plume .
In general
carbonatites contain very low concentrations of Pb, far below crustal levels, offering a clear
distinction from crustal carbonates.
Their Pb isotopic compositions are not contaminated by
crust, and can be used to probe the isotope geochemical signature of unseen deep carbon
mantle reservoirs.
A linear array for covariation of Nd-Sr isotope data (Table 8) lies on the East African
Carbonatite Line (EACL) and has often been thought to show binary mixing between the
mantle reservoirs of HIMU (high 238U/204Pb thought to be the results of recycled ancient,
altered oceanic crust) and EM1 (“enriched mantle 1”, caused by the recycling of continental
crust or lithosphere; ).
However, young carbonatites from the central Italian
21
rift (  2009) and Mesozoic carbonatites from
Shandong China (Figure 13) have much higher 87Sr/86Sr interpreted to reflect the controlling
influence of metasomatized lithospheric mantle ( Woolley and Bailey
2012).
Stable isotope ratios: Early studies of carbon and oxygen isotope ratios of carbonatites
focused on coarse-grained intrusive carbonatites associated with alkaline silicate rocks in
western Germany; Alnö, Sweden; and Colorado, USA, to define primary igneous
carbonatite  reproduced in  By observing the origins of
divergent trends in oxygen isotopes affected by secondary fluid/hydrothermal alteration, a
common origin could be defined.
Thus, the co-variation of carbon and oxygen isotopes were
used to define the “box” in the range δ13C -3.1 to -7.7 and δ18O +5.3 to +8.4 for primary
igneous carbonatite.
Subsequent studies of carbonatites show these features to be global in
nature  including a
more restricted range for fresh natrocarbonatite: δ13C -6.3 to -7.1 and δ18O +5.8 to +6.7
.
Natrocarbonatite undergoes atmospheric
alteration towards heavier isotopes  with δ18O rapidly increasing to ~ +24‰
and δ13C values changing less to -1.5‰ .
Scarce representatives of apparent “oceanic” carbonatites from La Palma and Fuerteventura
(Canary Islands, Spain), have δ18O of +13‰ and appear to have been overprinted by fluid
alteration .
The role of isotope fractionation has
often been neglected, but this can have a major influence on deep-carbon systems in general,
including carbonate melts and carbonatites.
Isotope fractionation has been considered to be a
22
significant process in (mantle) carbonate systems ( 1970, 2004) and early
experiments to 3 GPa showed C isotope fractionation between CO2 vapor and carbonate melt
.
Mass-independent fractionation of oxygen isotopes is also known from
thermal decomposition of carbonates  and there is a measurable effect of
thermal decarbonation on stable isotope composition of carbonates .
The mantle range for oxygen isotopes, as determined from the study of chondrites, mantle
xenoliths and basalts, is relatively restricted to between 5 and 6‰, slightly offset from bulk
peridotite silicate minerals such as olivine, orthopyroxene, clinopyroxene, and garnet, which
average 7 to 8‰ δ18O .
The carbon isotope signature of the mantle is more
difficult to determine due to the apparent previous under-estimation of high-temperature
isotope fractionation for carbon in the mantle , and also because there is
large uncertainty over the average concentration of carbon in the mantle (
 ).
A large variability is observed in the isotopic
compositions of meteorites, xenoliths, and basalts with respect to carbon, but carbonatites
seem to have a relatively restricted range with a mode around -5‰.
This value is more
positive than average mantle diamond and chondritic meteorite isotope signatures, and may
result from an unknown enrichment mechanism during melt formation from an isotopically
averaged source region .
GENESIS OF CARBONATITE MAGMAS
The three main theories for the origin of carbonatites are essentially:
1.
Residual melts of fractionated carbonated nephelinite or melilitite (
).
23
2.
Immiscible melt fractions of CO2-saturated silicate melts (Freestone and Hamilton
1980;   1989; 
   
 ).
3.
Primary mantle melts generated through partial melting of CO2-bearing peridotite
(   
).
Combinations of these three theories are also popular; for example carbonatite liquids
generated by deep melting of carbonated eclogite in the upper mantle infiltrate overlying
peridotite to produce silica under-saturated carbonate-bearing melts, which then penetrate
the crust and evolve or un-mix .
Carbonatites have also been
considered to be generated in the lithospheric mantle as partial melts rising rapidly above a
hot ascending mantle plume.
If these mantle carbonate melts stall, for example owing to
thermal death, they generate carbonate-melt metasomatism in the mantle .
As
the much hotter center of the plume approaches, melting is induced in the metasomatic
horizon and results in generation of the carbonatite melts that are observed on the surface
.
Although the plume model is quite attractive, recent recognition of
strong and repeated lithospheric controls in the compilation of global carbonatite ages are
thought to argue against a direct connection to mantle plumes .
Alternative models for natrocarbonatite petrogenesis have included anatexis of
metasomatised basement , incorporation of trona sediments
[Na3(CO3)(HCO3).2H2O], remobilization of carbonate material already present on the
24
volcano ( and references therein), and condensation from a comagmatic
fluid ( 2002).
Recently discovered provinces of Neogene- to Quaternary-aged carbonatite-silicate
volcanism in Europe (Italy, France, and Spain) are providing important new lines of research
for the mantle origins of extrusive carbonatite volcanism ( Stoppa
et al.
2005).
These new studies are exciting because, unlike carbonatites in general, the
young volcanoes have transported mantle xenoliths, which can help constrain their source
regions or wallrocks.
Derived geotherms can also constrain transport pathways for deep
carbon (b;  ).
These silicocarbonatite
volcanic rocks also preserve high-pressure carbonate minerals like aragonite
(CaCO3; a) as early high-pressure inclusions in olivine (Fo87) considered to
have crystallized in the mantle at depths of >100 km ( 2012).
Carbonate melt metasomatism
The low viscosity and chemical composition of carbonatites and carbonate melts (Table
1) makes them excellent metasomatic agents, and there are both experimental and natural
examples.
High P2O5/TiO2 or variable solubility in synthetic carbonate melts was used to
suggest metasomatised harzburgite by carbonatite melts ( Baker and
) and carbonate metasomatism has been inferred to occur in the lower mantle
from experiments at 20-24.5 GPa and 1600-2000 °C .
Thus,
while transfer of mobile silicate (basaltic) melts may adequately account for the chemistry of
many spinel peridotites and pyroxenites, highly mobile carbonate melts are believed to have
played a pivotal role in the formation of apatite pyroxenites/wehrlites (converted
25
peridotites), carbonate-bearing peridotites (reacted wallrock) and metasomatised mantle
xenoliths in continental terrains .
Carbonate-metasomatism is
observed in some eclogitic xenoliths ( 1997) and massive eclogite
terrains, implying an active role for metasomatic carbonate fluids in subduction zones
.
“Subduction” experiments with carbonated eclogite at 5-10 GPa,
corresponding to approximately 150-300 km depth in the mantle show, that the carbonatitic
solidus in eclogite is located at 4 GPa higher in pressure than in the peridotitic system; first
carbonate partial melts can be calcium-rich [Ca/(Ca+Fe+Mg) ~ 0.80] in contrast to those
produced by melting of carbonated peridotite [Ca/(Ca+Fe+Mg) ~ 0.50] 
possibly also influenced by the role of garnet in carbonated eclogite .
The Th/U ratio may be sensitive to mantle metasomatism related to carbonate or silicate
melts where clinopyroxene is stable  and ultrapotassic mantle
metasomatism in East Africa can be notably rich in fluorine ( Rosatelli et
al.
2003) and may result during emplacement of immiscible silicate-carbonatitie magmas
.
Melt inclusions in deep volcanic minerals and xenoliths from continental rift systems
commonly demonstrate the effects of metasomatism caused by carbonate melts (Seifert and
 b;  ).
Carbonate
melt metasomatism in lherzolite has also been related to derivation from kimberlite transport
in the mantle .
Sometimes direct evidence for high-pressure carbonatemelts
occurs trapped as inclusions in minerals, such as in ultramafic xenoliths from
Kerguelen related to oceanic upper mantle domains , and globally as
carbonatitic alkaline hydrous fluid inclusions in diamond ( Guthrie et al.
26
1991;  1994;  ), which in
addition to common inorganic carbon-species C-O-H volatiles also may contain
hydrocarbons and nitrogen .
The percolation of carbonatitic material through olivine-rock matrix (i.e.
mantle
peridotite) has been proposed to occur at a rate of several millimeters per hour by a process
of dissolution-precipitation .
These infiltration rates are
orders of magnitude higher than those previously found for basalt infiltration in mantle
lithologies.
However, it could be argued that such quick percolation may result in short
residence times, which may inhibit chemical interaction and metasomatism to take place
.
Transient mineral reactions to armor veins may greatly extend
metasomatic pathways while depleting fluids in silicate-compatible and hydrous components
(   
).
Evidence for carbonatite-related metasomatism has been repeatedly
recognized in the East African rift region, as manifest in fenitized rocks and glimmerites
with abundant phlogopite, pyroxene, and amphibole ( Dawson
and  1992;  ), as well as across the globe
in Italy (  2009; ),
Australia , Canary Islands , Grande Comore in
the Indian Ocean , and Greenland .
Carbonate melt crystallization of diamond.
Natural diamondiferous carbonatites are very rare but are known to occur at Chagatai,
Uzbekistan, and a few other diamond-bearing carbonatites are likely related to the
27
crystallization of carbonate-kimberlite ( 2003; ), where
it is thought that the diamond is syngenetic .
In principle, carbonate
melts, which are over-saturated with respect to dissolved carbon and sometimes visibly bear
graphite, are highly efficient diamond-forming systems under the thermodynamic conditions
of diamond stability .
Several
observations of carbonate as inclusions in mantle diamond  lead to
models of diamond formation involving carbonated melts in the mantle .
Carbonate melt inclusions have also been identified associated with diamond in continental
crust from high pressure metamorphic rocks (De  ),
interpreted as very deep subduction  with unknown
significance of recently recognized lonsdaleite (hexagonal diamond) in crustal rocks
.
Diamond is readily synthesized experimentally from simple carbonates
(a, 1999b, 2002a, 2002b), from alkali potassic carbonate (Shatskii et al.
2002), from hydrous-carbonate , from carbonate with sulphide (Spivak et
al.
2008), from mixed carbonate-alkali-halide systems , and from
mixed carbonate-silicate (kimberlitic) melts  to produce artificial diamond rock
or “diamondite” with polycrystalline diamond .
Experiments show
that “superdeep” diamond can crystallize rapidly from simple Mg-carbonate at pressures up
to 20 GPa .
Thus, carbonate melts have been suggested as a medium
for the efficient crystallization of diamonds in Earth’s mantle, broadly consistent with global
distribution of carbonatitic fluids trapped during the growth of natural “coated stone” type
mantle diamond 
28
although quantitative details of a genetic connection between carbonate melts and fluids in
the mantle are virtually unknown.
Magmas related to carbonate melts
For at least half a century field observations of alkaline silicate-carbonatite systems have
suggested a variety of petrogenetic pathways between carbonatites and alkaline silicate
magmas are preserved in surface volcanic products at least from the Proterozoic (Harmer
1999; ) through to Recent volcanism (Le ).
The associations have
been tested with increasing sophistication as experimental technology has advanced.
Pioneering phase equilibria studies delineated the important role of water (Wyllie and Tuttle
1962).
More recent experiments quantified partial melting of mantle lherzolite using major
components CaO-MgO-Al2O3-SiO2-CO2 with a CO2 content of 0.15 wt %, which showed a
continuous change in melt composition approximating to carbonatitic through to kimberlitic
melts over the minor melting range 0-1%, initially to a few GPa pressure (Dalton and
), to 3-8 GPa , and to 6-10 GPa pressure (Brey
et al.
2008), where additional preconditioning of the mantle by metasomatism is implicated.
In general these experimental studies have avoided alkaline-bearing or indeed alkaline-rich
and fluid-bearing systems (but see   Safonov et
al.
2007; ) and are still lacking in complexity, and for example,
understanding of oxygen fugacity compared with natural systems.
Direct experiments with natural carbonatitic rocks and minerals suffer from a host of
different problems, but they can provide indicative results (e.g.
).
Carbonatites may share geochemical trace element signatures with kimberlites (Hornig29
 Le ) and associations with other families of ultramafic
rocks such as lamprophyres where CO2-rich ocelli  might imply arrested
unmixing of immiscible liquids.
Round spherical textures, such as ocelli in rocks are
sometimes ambiguous  and coexisting silicate and carbonatite
lapilli have been also used to argue against a genetic association .
The
composition of primary kimberlite from the Slave Craton, based on samples of aphanitic
kimberlite from the Jericho kimberlite pipe, N.W.T., Canada, have minimum CO2 contents
(10-17 wt %) and geochemistry suggesting carbonatite affinities .
Potassic
silicate glass occurs with calcite carbonatite in lapilli from extrusive carbonatites at Rangwa
Caldera Complex, Kenya .
Group II mantle kimberlites have been
shown to be experimentally related to carbonate melts in their mantle source region (Ulmer
and ) and metasomatised mantle xenoliths can show, for example,
geochemical signatures transitional between kimberlites and carbonatites .
Detailed potential relationships between distinct families of silicate rocks and carbonatites
are given in dedicated books and reviews (Le   Woolley
2003;  b), and others have blurred the
boundaries between carbonatite and kimberlite volcanism  as evident in
early experiments .
Other indicative experiments of upper mantle carbonate melts have investigated liquid
immiscibility , the transition from
carbonate to silicate melts in the simplified CaO-MgO-SiO2-CO2 system (Moore and Wood
1998), mixed carbonate-chloride-silicate systems , dissociation of
carbonate in low pressure halide melts (  
30
2003) and the melting behavior of mantle carbonate-phlogopite lherzolite (Thibault et al.
1992).
FUTURE RESEARCH
Fundamental gaps remain in our knowledge of the petrogenesis of carbonate melts in the
deep mantle, which cloud our understanding of the possible origins of carbonatites,
including their relationships to mantle silicate rocks and to the deepest known mantle
magmas, kimberlites.
Carbonatites at high-pressure: New geological discoveries that provide insights on
carbonatites are still being made, and can be very instructive.
For example, carbonatitesilicate
volcanism carrying mantle xenoliths, carbonatites in major shear zones, and
carbonatites associated with ophiolite belts are providing new tests and ideas for
conventional research into mantle-derived carbonatitic melts ( Nasir et al.
2003;   2011;  
 ).
However, we still lack quantitative
understanding of high-pressure behavior in several critical areas; for example high-pressure
behavior of mixed C-O-H fluids to calculate carrying capacities over the range of
compositions transitional between carbonate-silicate mantle systems, and how these operate
in fluid-rich pathways escaping from subduction zones .
What have been
the roles of carbonate melts in the distribution of carbon throughout Earth’s history, and how
do these roles relate to changing mantle dynamics and different plate tectonic settings?
Key
will be to map out the phase stability of carbonates from the crust into the mantle to connect
31
observations from the deepest natural samples (inclusions in diamond) with predictions from
theory and experiment ( a, 1993b;  Brenker et
al.
2006, 2007).
Particularly relevant will be to understand the relative stabilities of lowpressure
carbonate and newly discovered families of high-pressure tetracarbonates.
Melt structure of tetracarbonates?
The transformation of carbonate minerals to
“tetracarbonates” represents potentially the most significant step-forward in the
understanding of the solid reservoirs of carbon at deeper mantle pressures (Oganov et al.
2013), in particular since experimental results suggest the transformation may involve a
range of carbon-bearing phases, including nanodiamond .
The
implications for carbonate melt structures, if these are present under lower mantle
geotherms, is intriguing to consider.
Changes in the density and viscosity in silicate melts
occur corresponding to phase changes in the equivalent solid phase due to increases in
coordination .
Thus, jadeite and albite melts display
increases in density in both solid and quenched glass phases between 1.0-1.5 GPa and
decreases in viscosity relating to the plagioclase to garnet phase transition (Karki and
).
We might therefore expect changes in behavior in carbonate melts
corresponding to phase transitions in their crystalline solids with increases in coordination
and close packing under compression.
Crystalline CaCO3 transforms from calcite to
aragonite structures at ~2 GPa ; however, MDS simulations of CaCO3
melts suggest no equivalent increase in Ca coordination from 6- to 8-fold (Genge et al.
1995b).
The large compressibility of CaCO3 melts predicted from these simulations,
however, would imply that coordination increases are inevitable at higher pressures (>11
32
GPa).
If transformation of CaCO3 melt structure to a tetrahedral carbonate occurs at lower
mantle pressures then a dramatic change in melt properties would be expected owing to the
ability of CO4 to form polymerizable networks.
If the theoretical increases in carbonate melt
viscosity at high pressures are verified  this behavior would
fundamentally inhibit mobility of carbonate melts in the lower mantle and transform
previous conceptions .
Significant changes in
the chemical properties of carbonate melts dramatically change their solubility for metal
cations.
The site of transformation of tetracarbonate to carbonate magmas in the lower
mantle could, therefore, be extremely significant for storage of deep mantle carbon, and we
might envisage, for example, precipitation of solid phases from rising carbonate melts.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to Alan Woolley, for providing a review of an early draft and to the
Natural History Museum London for access to additional specimens and research facilities.
The groundwork for this review was supported through graduate studentship training awards
at University College London provided by NERC.
